Dr. J. Olbrecht

The Science of Winning
Planning, Periodizing and Optimizing
Swim Training

CONTENTS
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
FOREWORD
INTRODUCTION
Part I

TRAINING

Chapter 1
TRAINING

DEFINITIONS AND PRINCIPLES OF

Chapter 2

COMPOSITION OF TRAINING

Chapter 3

METABOLIC ACTIVITY DURING SWIMMING

Chapter 4
CONTENT
Part I I

DETERMINING TRAINING INTENSITY AND
PLANNING AND PERIODIZATION OF TRAINING

Chapter 5

DEFINITIONS AND DESCRIPTIONS

Chapter 6

BASICS OF TRAINING PLANNING

Chapter 7

BASICS OF TRAINING PERIODIZATION

Chapter 8

METHODOLOGY FOR TRAINING

Chapter 9
TEMPLATES FOR PLANNING AND
PERIODIZATION
GLOSSARY OF THE BASIC TERMINOLOGY AND CONCEPTS
REFERENCES

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Many great people, too many to name them all, have helped me along the
road to this handbook. In thanking a few, I extend my thanks equally to
everyone.
Special thanks to Prof. Dr. med. Dr. h. c. W. Hollmann, former head of the
German Sports University of Cologne and Prof. Dr. A. Mader, my mentor,
who inspired and helped me find the link between pure and applied science,
between theory and practice.
I am grateful to all the coaches, throughout the world, who generously
shared their information, experience, training concepts and ideas. A close
collaboration and a good teamwork made this project possible. My gratitude
extends to all the athletes I have had the great pleasure to work with
throughout my career. I wish them all the best of success.
This English edition would not have been possible without the efforts and
support of several key people, and I thank them; especially Ernest W. and
Cheryl Maglischo, dear friends and colleagues, for their precious advice
and mentoring. Without their help this handbook would never have sounded
like English. Thanks to you, Jonathan Wiggins, ASA coach and dear friend,
who kindly accepted to review my manuscript and to critically evaluate it.
I give sincere thanks to Jerry and Stephanie Cosgrove for their stimulation,
encouragement, and support but above all for their friendship. Much
gratitude also goes to Clive Rushton, Charlie Wilson and several
corporations, among them the ISTC (Institute of Swimming Teachers and
Coaches of Great-Britain), Swim Shop, Speedo, the Olympic Health
Foundation (an initiative of the Belgian Olympic and Interfederal
Committee), the VVS (Flemish Society of Sports Medicine) and Arena
Insurances, for their interest, appreciation and endorsement. Their
contribution and support allowed me to pursue my passion.
Finally many thanks go to my family who have showered me with love and
support and especially to my wife, Pascale, for her inspiration, drive and
above all her endless patience in trying to unravel my manuscript.
This work really is the product of all of them.

I hope you will take great pleasure in reading this handbook and I wish you
a successful career as a coach.

FOREWORD
The training of competitive swimmers has not changed very much since the
late 1970’s. The last significant advance occurred in the Western world
when information about blood testing and the anaerobic threshold came
from the laboratory of the esteemed sports scientist, Alois Mader, from the
Institute of Sport in Cologne, in what was then West Germany. Many of us
embraced the anaerobic threshold concept of training and used blood testing
to monitor the progress of our swimmers. In the process we encountered
many difficulties in areas involving selection of testing protocols,
interpreting the results of blood tests, and applying those results to the
planning of training. One of the most confusing contradictions was that, in
many cases, athletes who improved their anaerobic thresholds did not
necessarily perform better while, at the same time, some athletes who
appeared to lose aerobic endurance actually had lifetime best swims. We
knew we lacked important information about this concept of training and
the monitoring procedures we were using but we did not know what that
information was.
Jan Olbrecht has written a most important book that fills many of the gaps
in our knowledge. I am proud to endorse this book because it details the
results of more than two decades of research on planning and monitoring
the training of competitive swimmers that addresses many of the questions
we had about the anaerobic threshold concept of training. This information
will change the way coaches and athletes approach the planning of their
training.
Let me talk a little about Jan Olbrecht the person and scientist before
discussing his excellent text.
Jan Olbrecht was student of Dr. Mader’s when I first met him in the early
1980’s. Although he has served as a consultant to coaches and athletes from
a variety of sports, Jan’s first love is competitive swimming. Having been a
national champion and record holding swimmer in his native Belgium, he is
particularly interested in applying his research to the training of swimmers.
When I met him, I was seeking information about training competitive
swimmers in general and blood testing in particular and Jan was kind

enough to share his knowledge with me. We have remained friends since
that time.
Jan is a respected scientific professional whose research has been reported
in many prestigious journals throughout the world. He is also much sought
after as a speaker at scientific meetings. Despite his impressive scientific
achievements, Jan remains a practical person who is interested, first and
foremost, in communicating his research findings to coaches and athletes in
order to help them perform better. For this reason, his research has always
been specific to the training situation and his results have always been
immediately useful to coaches like myself and others throughout the world.
Jan has spent his adult years developing procedures not only to investigate
important aspects of training in the laboratory but also to developing
monitoring procedures that can be used in the field to help athletes structure
their training more effectively. Because of his athletic background, Jan has
the ability to communicate the results of his studies to coaches and athletes
in understandable and practical terms. For this reason, several coaches
urged him to put his information into print, which led to the writing of this
book.
Within these pages, Jan describes the complex relationship between aerobic
and anaerobic training and makes it clear why interpreting the results of
blood testing on aerobic endurance without also considering the effect that
training had on anaerobic capacity will result in errors of interpretation that
may cause coaches to make the wrong judgements about the training needs
of their athletes.
He advances some new important concepts. Most notably that training at
anaerobic threshold speeds is not the most effective way to improve aerobic
endurance and that aerobic and anaerobic metabolism must be developed to
optimum, not maximum, levels in order to perform well in competition.
Also included are his ideas on the planning and periodization of training.
These ideas have contributed considerably to the recent success of
competitive swimmers and athletes from other sports throughout Europe but
particularly in the Netherlands and Belgium. Jan presents this information
with understandable writing that is replete with practical examples.
There is an excellent section on why training must be individualized even
for athletes who compete in the same event. It also includes information on

how to “spot” athletes with different physiological makeups and how to
adapt training for them. In another important portion of this text he
discusses the important aerobic and anaerobic adaptations to training and
ways to achieve them including the role played by altitude training. Once
again, there are many excellent and practical examples of training sets that
will achieve the various results athletes seek. Finally, Jan provides several
insightful suggestions concerning the training of age-group competitive
swimmers.
I believe coaches and athletes at all stages of development can profit from
the information in this book. Further, I believe the information presented
will raise the standard of swimming performance throughout the world.
Dr. Ernest W. Maglischo
Successful coach and expert in physiology and biomechanics of competitive swimming

The ‘96 Olympic Games of Atlanta heralded a new era in the Dutch
swimming. Kirsten Vlieghuis won 2 bronze medals (400 m and 800 m
freestyle), Pieter van den Hoogenband (4th place) and Marcel Wouda (4th
place) managed to join with the world’s top athletes and even our young
relay teams unexpectedly reached the Olympic finals, something they had
not succeeded in for many years.
There seemed thus to be a successful future in store for the Dutch
swimming team.
We in the Netherlands, of course, knew about lactate but until then we had
seldom monitored training by means of lactate measurements, or to put it
another way, the lactate tests results and their interpretation missed any
direct link or “translation” to the training practice.
What about the shift of the lactate curve? What is good? What is not?
What is the real message of the lactate readings for the coach?
What does a lactate value really tell us about the conditioning profile of the
swimmer?
The sciences did not seem to be able to provide an adequate, effective and
conclusive answer to all the questions I, as a coach, was confronted with in
the swimming pool! I felt my own experience, my own perception and my
own views on training matched better with the results in competition than
the dry sometimes even implausible scientific measurements.
It was shortly after the Olympic Games that I got the opportunity to meet
Jan Olbrecht, whom I, so far, only knew from his many (to me often
unreadable) scientific contributions on lactate. Our first talk hit the mark; he
provided the answers I had sought for so many years. Indeed, although I felt
I was working in the right direction I could not always explain the
swimmer’s adaptations and evolution. Now, Jan unraveled in a scientific but
still simple and quite comprehensible way - which was very much in
contrast with what I expected from a dry professor - these inexplicable
“evolvements”. He corroborated my feelings as a coach and gave me the
tools to understand what actually happened to my swimmers
physiologically. Seen in this light, the lactate readings took on a completely
new meaning. For the first time in my coaching career I had learned
something new which was immediately workable and practicable in
training.

I really must say that our collaboration for the past 3 years has been very
productive and has played an important part in the success of our team.
Indeed, in view of the lactate test results Jan determines the workload each
swimmer can sustain and assesses for each swimmer individually the
appropriate training load and the most adequate strategies and
implementations in training. This new scientific training approach does not
imply I have to throw away my own specific training methods but it enables
me to individualize and structure the training planning and periodization in
a systematic, purposive and scientific way. The discussion we have each
time on the test results is always very useful and instructive and teaches me
a lot about the metabolic impact of the different workouts.
I personally think this book should be considered as a manual for the
modern coach who wants to know before planning and periodizing what
kind of conditioning adaptations he may expect. It provides knowledge and
shares experience but it is above all understandable and applicable to every
training situation. It remains furthermore an enormous challenge to plan and
apply the new training methods in the right way and at the right time. But
do not think it will spare you work. Quite the contrary. It provides tools to
systematically build up the appropriate training for each swimmer
individually.
The title of the book is clear but is in no way exaggerated - the
performances of the Dutch National Swimming Team in general and the
Eindhoven team in particular speak for themselves. The part Jan, together
with his wife and right-hand Pascale played in that success goes without
saying for which I really want to express my gratitude.
Jacco Verhaeren
Coach PSV Eindhoven

I have known Jan Olbrecht for almost 20 years starting when we were both
swimmers on the Belgian National Team. However, the story of our close
collaboration as coach and scientist started in 1987.
I was at that time a young coach and the training methods I was familiar
with and with which I apparently had success as a swimmer (endurance
training until 5-6 weeks before the important competition, followed by 3
weeks specific anaerobic training and 2 weeks of tapering-off), were not
always effective for me as a coach. I was thus on the look-out for a new
approach, a more purposive way of coaching, “something” that would
enable me to evaluate the planned as well as the completed training and to
adapt or adjust it, where and when necessary.
My first introduction to lactate testing and Jan’s new training concepts
indicated that this might be that new approach I had been seeking.
Nevertheless, it took me a few months to master the test results and to put
the subsequent training advice into practice. Every 5 to 6 weeks the
swimmers were evaluated and so also was my planning. The lactate testings
not only confronted me with the results of the completed training period but
also indicated the changes or adjustments that needed to be made in the next
mesocycle so the swimmer’s conditioning could evolve and their specific
needs could be met.
Since 1988, I have had the great pleasure and the tremendous challenge of
coaching some top level swimmers, finalists at the Olympic Games, World
and European Championships (among others Stefaan Maene, Brigitte
Becue, the Dutch National Swimming team).
Jan Olbrecht’s innovating scientific approach helps me structure the training
individually and systematically. His way of combining science and practice
surely helps me bring my swimmers to their top form at the right moment.
Stefaan Obreno
Head Coach National Dutch Swimming Team

INTRODUCTION
The swim coach is an artist molding intuition, feeling, creativity, scientific
knowledge and experience into an efficient and well thought up training
plan meant to help the swimmer bring top performances.
But, an athlete cannot win an Olympic gold medal nor set a World record
just like that. The way to a top performance is long, complex and tricky and
will undoubtedly raise thousands of questions such as, for example, how to
design the endurance training of a sprinter? How to improve the anaerobic
capacity? Which training exercises can or cannot be put together in one
training unit? What is the most appropriate time for technique training?
What is the super-compensation effect? What will determine the time
needed to reach super-compensation? How to train the anaerobic power?
How to ensure the most efficient way of training? Can heart rate or lactate
tests be used to maximize training efficiency? How to plan and periodize
age group training? How to avoid stagnation of the competitive
performance? What is training planning? What is training periodization?
How to prepare a long distance swimmer for 2 consecutive competition
weekends?
This book is not only the result of more than 2 decades of research on
planning and monitoring the training of competitive swimmers but it is
above all the product of a very close collaboration with many national and
international top coaches such as E. Maglischo, J. Verhaeren, St. Obreno,
M. Lohberg, M. Pedroletti, M. Guizien, A. Paeck, H. Verbauwen, R.
Gaastra, etc. They not only generously shared their information, experience,
training concept and ideas but also confronted me with the sometimes huge
gaps between theory and practice and challenged me to search for answers.
This book does not claim to know it all or to provide all the answers. It is
meant to stimulate or incite the coach to keep an open mind to any
information he gets, to challenge him to create his own training philosophy,
using his experience and vision in concert with the new scientific findings,
to help him gain an understanding of the physiological effects the different
types of training may induce and finally to assist him in maximizing
training efficiency to achieve the results he is after.

There is of course not one single way of training, but there are a very few
important principles that need to be respected; only a solid and wellconceived training plan with clear directions and based on systematic and
superintended progressions can guarantee maximal benefit. The key of
success does not lie in training hard but in training purposively and
carefully . Failing to plan and follow a training and competition program
will surely undermine your athlete’s potential and inevitably result in
frustration or, what is even worse, in overtraining or injuries.

How to use this book
This book has been written so the coach can use the information of each
chapter independently as a foundation to create his own training system and
philosophy.
It should be considered as a puzzle. The first two chapters of part I reveal
the pieces:
* the most important definitions and principles of training
* the different types of training and exercises
* the training effects one can expect
Through chapter 3, which is a little bit more theoretical and complex, the
coach will gain an understanding of the metabolic activity during
swimming. This chapter could be skipped but many of the new training
methods rest on metabolic research. Basic knowledge on metabolics in
swimming will therefore surely help to take up the development of the new
training methods to come. Chapter 4 provides tools and methods to define
the swimmer’s type and to determine individual training objectives and
correct intensity zones. We chose to include the latter chapters in this part,
as for an appropriate, well-balanced and thought-out planning and
periodization (part II) it is of great benefit to first understand some
important physiological processes induced by training. A better
comprehension and a clear insight into the metabolic impact of training will
enable the coach to give full vent to his fantasy and to create his own
winning training plan .
Part II will guide and help the coach put all the puzzle pieces in place. After
a short theoretical introduction (chapter 5, Definitions and Descriptions),
you will find the basics of planning and periodizing (chapter 6 and 7): a
detailed description of the successive stages the athlete has to go through to

ensure a continuous performance improvement over several years. Finally
in chapter 8 and 9 (templates) you will learn to frame and draw up step by
step and methodically the training plan that will help you achieve your
objectives.
In the end, when all the pieces of the puzzle are put in the right place, you
will have a specific training plan which is just made out for your particular
athlete and which will surely help him win the gold medal.

Part I

TRAINING

Chapter 1
DEFINITIONS AND
PRINCIPLES OF TRAINING
Training for athletics is scientifically defined as “the systematic and
purposeful activation of the muscles with the objective to improve
performance through morphological (structural) and functional adaptations”
(Hollmann 1990).
Thus, it is considered training if there is an activation of the muscles.
Although nutrition and eating habits may affect the success of training, the
muscle development, and, consequently, the performance in competition,
they are not considered training. Mental training, however, induces muscle
activity. It fits therefore with the definition above and will be seen as a form
of training.
Performance in competition depends on several determinant components
that fall into 3 main classes (tab. 1):
Technique
Physical conditioning
Psychology and mental strength
A coach who wishes to train an athlete for a high competitive performance
must ensure that all these components are emphasized within the training
plan.
In this book we will focus on the physical conditioning of swimmers,
without losing sight of the fact that “technique” and “psychological
capabilities” also strongly affect performance in competition. Indeed,
despite possessing a high level of physical conditioning, a swimmer that is
not able to control or cope with the competitive pressure will never perform
at his best, nor will he exhaust his conditioning potential.

SUPER-COMPENSATION
Description
A healthy human body adjusts itself to stimuli provided by the
environment. For example, if one travels to La Paz, Bolivia, which is
located at an elevation of 12,000 feet above sea level, he certainly will, at
first, have trouble breathing and experience difficulty even with light
activity. After a few days however, his body will adjust to this extreme
altitude and, after an adaptation period, he will even be able to resume
nearly normal activity. Similarly if one travels to a “warmer” country, he
will inevitably experience some discomfort for the first few days. After a
few days, however, the heat will become tolerable and the level of
discomfort will lessen because a healthy human body always adjusts itself
to ongoing stress. Likewise, a body that is regularly exposed to a certain
level of exercise will, after an adaptation period, be able to handle greater
workloads and, consequently, be capable of performing better in
competition.
The adaptation phenomenon is ruled by the “principle of supercompensation” which follows 4 distinctive phases (fig. 1):
Phase 1 :
during this phase the swimmer completes a
large volume of training; he becomes tired and his physical
performance drops (curve decline)

Phase 2 :
the so-called recovery phase induced by very
low intensity training (regeneration training or active rest) and rest
between training sessions. The physical performance will now
return to the starting level (curve rise equals compensation for the
hard work). This phase allows for several biological adaptations to
take place:
✽
normalization of the cell environment: waste products are
removed, the pH-values normalize and the cell structures recover
✽ recovery of neuromuscular stimulation processes: a tired
muscle does not react optimally to stimuli from the nerves. This
will be restored when the muscle recovers
✽
concentration and activity of enzymes and hormones will be
restored
✽
energy sources are replenished. Glycogen and other fuel
sources are restored
Phase 3 : the super-compensation phase : physical performance
increases above the initial level . The swimmer can now handle
the same load as before but with less strain or a more intense load
with the same ease
Phase 4 :
if training is not carried on, the improvement in
physical capacity will be progressively lost

Fig. 1 Schematic representation of “the principle of super-compensation”
(Jakowlew).

Requirements for a Successful Super-Compensation Process:
1. A healthy body : inflammation, overtraining, mental stress, etc.
strongly reduce the possibility for super-compensation
2. Adequate training intensity and volume : This is probably the most
delicate, even crucial aspect of successful training. Indeed, the
training must be just long enough (volume) and just hard enough
(intensity) to stimulate the body in such a way as to induce
morphological (structural) and functional adaptations. When
training is too hard and/or too long, it will break down the body
too much and will actually impede the process of supercompensation. So, the real art is always adjusting intensity and
volume to meet the purpose of the training as well as the
conditioning and mental state of the athlete. We will come back to
this later
3. Enough rest (passive or active rest): rest or regenerative workouts
will make up most of an athlete’s training time. Insufficient rest or

insufficient low intensity training (regeneration training) between
important training sessions prevents the body from achieving
super-compensation
This brings us to one of the most important and overriding principles in
training:

Timing
With a healthy athlete the time necessary for super-compensation (fig. 2)
depends on several factors:
*
*
*

the type and duration of the workout
the conditioning level of the athlete
the recovery level of the athlete

If the swimmer has a high conditioning level and/or is well rested, the time
for super-compensation will be shorter. Mental stress and fatigue on the
other hand, will slow down the process necessary to achieve supercompensation.
Furthermore, there should be a distinction between long and short sets in
training. For example, an intensive anaerobic set of 600 m will require a
longer time for super-compensation than a shorter set of the same type (e.g.
set of 150 m).
*
Long anaerobic set of 600 m - e.g. 3 x 200 m broken (4 x 50 m
max. with 10 sec rest) and 10 minutes rest between each set
*
Short anaerobic set of 150 m - e.g. 2 x 75 m max. (50 m + 25 m
with 10 sec rest after the 50 m) and 10 minutes rest after the first set
The 150 m set will require only 2 days for super-compensation while the
600 m set will require a longer period (3 to 4 days).
These differences in timing for super-compensation are due to the duration
of the various biological regeneration processes that take place during the
recovery phase. While the replenishment of creatine phosphate will take
only a few seconds to a couple of minutes to return to normal levels, the

reloading of the muscle with glycogen may last up to 24 hours or, in some
cases, even longer. The production of new enzymes or proteins may also
take hours, sometimes even days to complete.

Fig. 2 Time, expressed in hours, for different types of training to reach the
maximal super-compensation (Olbrecht 1998 not published, used in oral
presentations).
Long but extensive (low intensity) training sets cause little or no structural
breakdown of the organism. In this case, only the expended energy supplies
will have to be replenished, so the time necessary to recover from this type
of effort will be quite short.

Intensive training units, on the other hand, swallow energy and are very
destructive for the organism. They will, therefore, require a considerably
longer regeneration period (recovery phase) because the energy supplies
will have to be refilled and a number of proteins and enzymes will need to
be reconstructed.

BIOLOGICAL ADAPTATIONS
The adaptations of the human organism follow a regular pattern. During the
first 1 to 2 weeks of a new training cycle the body adapts quickly to the new
stimulus. In the next few weeks the power of this same stimulus to provoke
an adaptation will progressively fade to end up completely after 6 weeks
(fig. 3). We therefore call week 1 and 2 of the adaptation process the “fast
adaptation phase” and weeks 3 to 6 the “stabilization phase” .
After the body stops responding to the current training load (intensity
and/or volume), it is necessary to increase it to induce further adaptation.
This means that, after about 6 weeks, training should be modified by either:
1. increasing the training volume
2. increasing the training intensity
3. increasing the frequency per week of training units or intensive
workouts
4. changing the proportion of workouts in each stroke (e.g. changing
from freestyle to breaststroke while keeping volume and intensity
the same)
5. making the training program more difficult by changing the
training environment such as training at altitude or by reducing the
regenerative training between intensive workouts (e.g.
maintaining the same number of intensive workouts per week but
with less extensive training units between them)
6. a combination of the changes in points 1-5

Fig. 3 Adaptation process in the organism as a result of a training stimulus.
Why wait 6 weeks before introducing a new stimulus or a new training
load? Why not change the training plan after 2 weeks when the stimulus has
induced its fast adaptation? The reason is that weeks 3 to 6 are necessary to
stabilize the adaptations brought about in weeks 1 and 2.
Let’s take an example of an adaptation in endurance:
For the improvement of the endurance capacity to take place, thousands of
small cellular parts need to be rebuilt and/or newly produced. Some of them
will be rebuilt quickly while others will require more time. If the training
load is increased too soon, only the cellular structures that can adapt quickly
will be able to follow the imposed training rhythm. All the others will fall
behind; they will not be rebuilt or, at worst, be irrevocably lost. As a
consequence, there will be no homogeneous development of the endurance
capacity and, in due course, this may result in the swimmer breaking down
and becoming overtrained.
Moreover, it is important to reduce both volume and intensity near the end
of the stabilization phase in order to start the next training cycle in a fresh
and relaxed condition.

In addition to the fact that the basic physiological adaptation pattern
requires six weeks, there are two other equally important principles of
training adaptation that must be considered. The first is called the
detraining process while the second is referred to as the declining return
on training investment .

DETRAINING PROCESS
Whenever the athlete stops training, a “detraining” process sets in, inducing
a relatively rapid loss of the acquired adaptation. For example, half the
increase in mitochondria from 5 weeks of training may be lost in 1 week of
detraining (fig. 4). Since the number of mitochondria substantially
determines the endurance capacity of the swimmer, it is obvious that the
loss of 1 week of training will have a marked effect on the endurance.

Fig. 4 The evolution of the number of mitochondria in the muscle cell as a
function of the number of weeks of training, detraining and retraining.
It will require nearly 4 weeks of “retraining” for the swimmer to regain his
condition after 1 week of detraining. Therefore, it is clear that only
regularity and continuity in the training process will ensure progression of
conditioning over several years.

Practical experience has taught us that the rate of detraining of the
endurance capacity depends on the time that has been spent in building up
this capacity. In other words, the more time the swimmer spends building
up his endurance capacity, the longer this capacity will remain strong, even
when he drastically reduces training. The following two examples illustrate
this finding:
1. A top level swimmer, who was preparing for the World
Championships, had to interrupt the last 7 months of her
preparation quite frequently because of school commitments and
injuries. Despite these breaks in training the swimmer improved her
endurance capacity from 58 to 64 ml/kg per min within the last 8
weeks prior to the competition. However, a test 2 weeks after the
World Championships revealed that her aerobic capacity had
dwindled to 59 ml/kg per min: a loss of 5 ml/kg after only 2 weeks
of rest. In contrast, her training mates, who got through the entire
preparation period without interruption, managed to keep almost the
same level of aerobic capacity they had before the competition
despite 2 weeks of taper followed by 2 weeks of nearly no training
(the transition period)
2. If a swimmer misses training because of an injury, providing it is
not a serious injury or an infectious disease, the time he will need to
regain his previous level of endurance capacity will be shorter if the
build-up period has been long. Indeed, if a swimmer had a
continuous build-up period of at least 4 months prior to his injury,
then it would not be unusual for him to regain his previous aerobic
capacity level after only 14 days of retraining. On the other hand, a
swimmer who built up his aerobic capacity in only 5 weeks will
undoubtedly lose more of his aerobic capacity after 2 weeks of
forced inactivity and have to restart the build-up process again
These two examples tell us that:
as long as the training period preceding a period of inactivity due
to injury or illness - providing it is not serious - was continuous
and long enough , there is no reason to panic. The swimmer will
be able to regain his previous level of conditioning within a short
time. Alternative training exercises such as strength training,

gymnastics or even other sports like cycling (e.g. if shoulder is
injured) will help to reduce the time needed to regain the previous
level. However, recovering health and fitness remains, of course,
the priority
it is “vital” to grant the swimmer a week of rest after the last main
competition before starting a new macrocycle
it is physiologically possible to keep a swimmer in good form for
several successive competitions for up to 4 weeks, provided the
build-up period was long enough and the swimmer is highly
motivated. The psychological and mental support will in this case
prevail over conditioning

DECLINING RETURN ON TRAINING INVESTMENT
Studies based on scientific research have shown that the rate of
improvement in conditioning is not linear to the increase of training load.
As a matter of fact, the effect of an increase in training load (increase of
intensity and/or volume) will be different depending upon the conditioning
level of the swimmer. Indeed, the better the conditioning level, the greater
the training load that will be needed to make even slight improvements.
Consequently, the risks of injury and overtraining will be greater. Or, to put
it differently, the better the swimmer, the less improvement a same increase
in training load will produce. This phenomenon is called the principle of
declining return on training investment (fig. 5).

Fig. 5 Percentage of improvement related to the increase of training load.
The principle of declining return on training investment is applicable to
all kinds of training adaptations:
quick adaptation such as strength training
fairly slow adaptation such as the improvement in VO2 max
slow adaptation such as the development of the cardiovascular
system, joints and tendons, etc.
With this principle in mind it is clear that we should always look for the
smallest increment of training load that will produce the greatest possible
training effect. For example, as long as swimmers can improve their
conditioning with one single training session a day, they need not train
twice a day, except during training camps, of course.
Each change in the training load has to be introduced gradually and
progressively over time. Increasing the training load of young, talented
swimmers radically and extremely will result in successes in the short run,

but stagnation will soon set in. When this happens, most athletes become
discouraged and stop training.
The principle of declining return on training investment is a common rule in
the training process, but its rate is very individual. Indeed, a given training
load will not induce the same conditioning improvement for every
swimmer. In other words, each swimmer adapts differently and at his own
rhythm to a certain training load. So, patience is needed to reach the
adaptation longed for. There is no point in trying to force it, particularly
with less talented swimmers. High performance swimmers, on the other
hand, nearly always have a high rate of improvement regardless of how
strenuous the workload may be. The rate of improvement that results from a
certain workload could therefore be a good standard to detect or identify
new talent.

THE WAVE PRINCIPLE IN THE TRAINING PROCESS
To ensure a continuous improvement of conditioning, it is not only
necessary to change the training load after approximately 6 weeks (see
Biological Adaptations) but also to provide regular periods of regeneration
training for the super-compensation to take place. The structure of an
effective and successful training process will therefore be characterized by a
continuous alternation of periods of increased training load (training units at
a higher intensity and/or volume) and periods of reduced training
(regeneration training).
This alternation of intensive or high volume training and regeneration
sessions, often referred to as the wave principle of training , can easily be
achieved by:
1.

working with mesocycles (see The Mesocycle) of 2 to 7 weeks
divided into two parts. The first part (the working phase) should
encompass about 3/5 of the mesocycle and consist of high volume
sets and some intensive workouts. The rest of the mesocycle (the
recovery phase) should be a regeneration period consisting of only
a few quality sets (workouts at high intensity) and a lot of
regenerative training

The following figure (fig. 6) presents a 5-week mesocycle. During the
first part of the cycle (week 1 to 3, the working phase), the training load

is progressively increased by raising volume, intensity and frequency of
the intensive workouts. For example, from week 1 to week 2 the total
volume increases and the number of quality sets is doubled. In the third
week, the frequency of the quality sets remains the same as in week 2
but the intensity and total volume of these sets increase during the
second part of the mesocycle (week 4 and 5, the recovery phase) the
training load should be reduced by decreasing volume as well as
intensity (such as only 1 or 2 intensive workouts, which will be shorter
than during the working phase)
2.
alternating intensive and high volume sessions with
regeneration training within each week of the mesocycle. It is
absolutely essential to intersperse the intensive sets with a lot of very
extensive work in order to enhance the effect of the progressively
increased workload

Fig. 6 The wave principle during a 5-week mesocycle (Olbrecht
1998 not published, used in oral presentations).
Variations on this mesocycle are always possible, sometimes even
necessary, but the wave pattern must remain present, both in volume and in

intensity. In chapter 6, Basics on Training Planning (see Mesocycle), we
will focus on and discuss the pros and cons of the different types of
mesocycles.
We can conclude that:

Note: It is often claimed that “variation is necessary in training” to cheer up
and motivate the swimmers. It must be clearly stated that variations in
training are meant to meet training objectives and not to reduce the
boredom of the swimmers. The coach will already have plenty of
opportunities to vary training to motivate his swimmers as the training
objectives change during the different steps of the training process.

Chapter 2
TRAINING

COMPOSITION OF

TRAINING TERMS AND CONCEPT
Before describing the different types of workouts and the effects they may
induce, it is necessary to define some training terms.
A training unit or training session (see The Training Unit) is one
complete training period during the day that can be carried out in or out of
the water. Elite swimmers, for example, often complete 2 training units in
the water and 1 training unit on land each day. Beginners may do only 2 or
3 training units a week and all these are in the water.
A group of training units forms a specific training period or training cycle .
These cycles are characterized by the time they last and will be repeated
frequently during the swimming season.
The smallest cycle is called a microcycle (see The Microcycle). In
swimming a microcycle generally covers 1 training week. A mesocycle (see
The Mesocycle) is a succession of a few microcycles, lasts about 2 to 7
weeks and contains a phase of hard work followed by a phase of relatively
easy training. The duration of this period will depend upon the training
objectives during that training period and on the conditioning level of the
swimmer. A macrocycle (see The Macrocycle) consists of several
mesocycles. It stretches over several months and covers a specific season
such as the short course season. It covers the base, competition and
transition training periods.
There are usually 2 macrocycles per year, but the competition calendar
sometimes forces the coach to plan for 3 to 4 macrocycles. This is only
possible for the very top level swimmers, however. For age group
swimmers, it is advisable to stick to 2 macrocycles per year since more
macrocycles would hurt the long-term build-up of their conditioning. All
this may sound complicated, but it will become clearer when planning and
periodization are discussed in the second part of the book.

THE BASIC ELEMENTS OF A TRAINING EXERCISE THE KEY TO SUCCESSFUL WORKOUTS
Within a single training session a coach designs various sets or repeats and
drills. These repeats are not chosen at random, but according to the
physiological adaptations he wants them to induce. Every workout,
therefore, has an “objective” and has to be designed, planned and
implemented in a way to produce the right adaptation at the right moment.
Let’s give an example: a coach asks his swimmer to swim 5 x 400 m with
30 sec rest. This set or repeats can be swum at different speeds, but it is the
adaptation wished for that will determine the speed of the set. If it is
intended to improve the aerobic capacity (increase of VO2 max), the coach
may choose to split the first 400 m into 4 x 100 m - each 100 m with a
negative split (each 25 m is faster with the last 25 m nearly at max.) and
with about 90 sec rest between each 100 m -, followed then by 4 x 400 m at
a very extensive (slow) pace with 30 sec rest. If, on the other hand, the
second part of the set (4 x 400 m with 30 sec rest) is swum at a speed near
to the lactate threshold (maximal lactate steady state) then, instead of
improving his aerobic capacity, the swimmer will improve his aerobic
power (definition of aerobic capacity and power, see Capacity and Power
Training).
A set of repeats should not only be carried out correctly, but be prepared
carefully as well. If during a training session the coach plans a set of
sprints, it is obvious that he would not let his swimmer jump directly into
the water and sprint. The swimmer will have to prepare for this exercise
with a warm-up, in which he will accelerate to sprint speed a few times
after easy swimming. In this way he will prepare his muscles for the tension
that is to follow. If he fails to do so, the sprints will not only lose their
effectiveness, but the swimmer will run a greater risk of injury or overload
his muscles.
By manipulating the following 4 basic elements of a training exercise, the
coach selects the biological adaptations he wants the exercise to induce.
These features are:
1. The set distance (or volume ) of the exercise (how many meters)
2. The intensity (how fast one is going to swim)

3. The rest (how long one waits before resuming the exercise)
4. The repeat distance or interval (length of each swim); an exercise
is often divided into partial distances
Example**
6 x 200 m Back
time = 2:35

Rest = 30 sec

Swimming

Volume = 1200 m
Intensity = 2:35
Interval or repeat distance = 200
m
Rest = 30 sec
What about Repetitions?
If we know the volume of the set and the distance of the repeats (intervals),
we can easily deduce the number of repetitions. Moreover, experience
teaches us that adaptations are primarily determined not by the number of
repetitions of a workout but by its volume, intensity, rest and repeat
distance. The effectiveness of the different training sets will therefore
change by varying one or more of these 4 components.

CAPACITY AND POWER TRAINING
The various training exercises have 2 primary objectives:
1.
the “building-up” of the various components a swimmer
needs to improve his conditioning
2. the “fine-tuning” of these components to maximize their contribution
in competition and to provide an optimal synergism between them. To

illustrate this, imagine 2 top level rowers in the same boat. If one of them
rows with a slow frequency and the other with a rather high frequency or
if the first one is a fast starter and the other a fast finisher, you can easily
see that putting them together in the same boat will cause
synchronization problems. Each of the rowers may be a champion
individually, but together they will never perform well. A similar
situation happens in team sports. You need a team to win and not a group
of individual stars
The workouts that are principally meant to build up the swimmer’s
conditioning are labeled as capacity training exercises . The increase of
maximal oxygen uptake (VO2 max), the increased breakdown of
carbohydrates (glycolysis) as well as the increase of maximal force fall
under this category. The exercises used for the fine-tuning, on the other
hand, are referred to as power training workouts .
The properties of the aerobic and anaerobic metabolism are the determining
factors of an athlete’s competitive performances. With respect to the
building-up or fine-tuning of both conditioning components we will split
aerobic (endurance) and anaerobic training, respectively, into capacity and
power training and speak of:
aerobic and anaerobic capacity training when we want to build
up the maximal oxygen uptake and maximal lactate production
rate respectively
aerobic and anaerobic power training when we want to fine tune
both capacities in order to maximize their utilization during
competition. This fine-tuning will differ depending upon the
distance of the event for which the swimmer is preparing
It is obvious that the “building-up” of capacities (capacity training) always
will precede and last longer than the “fine-tuning” (power training).
Example: After several weeks focusing on building up the aerobic capacity
of a long distance swimmer (increasing VO2 max), it is not unusual that the
swimmer’s anaerobic capacity will increase too (increase of glycolysis).
But, if this anaerobic capacity becomes too strong the percentage of the
aerobic capacity at which the athlete competes will decrease which will
prevent him from using his endurance capacity maximally during a 1500 m

competition. The ideal situation would then be to have the 1500 m
competition preceded by a period of 4-6 weeks during which the aerobic
capacity is “kept in shape” and the anaerobic capacity reduced to an optimal
level. This fine-tuning can be done either by considerably increasing the
training volume or by inserting some endurance power training during the
competition period (see Classification of Training Exercises).
Why not select training sets that make fine-tuning unnecessary?
There is no training set (even a workout at the maximum lactate steady
state) that induces all of the biological adaptations needed to improve
performance in competition. This becomes clear when we consider:
that each of the biological adaptations not only requires a different
type of training but also a different time to get induced
that not all training sets are compatible. Some training sets work
against the adaptations produced by other sets
If, for example, the objective is to improve the aerobic capacity, several
things have to be taken into account:
a. An improvement in endurance capacity requires a lot of
morphological (structural) adaptations such as building new
enzymes, new capillaries, new cell particles, etc. The coach will
therefore have to earmark much more time to improve the endurance
capacity of his swimmer than to build up his anaerobic capacity (see
Methodology for Training Planning)
b. As the improvements in aerobic capacity require various changes in
the biological systems, it is clear that the timing of these changes
will vary. Some of them will take days, others weeks; some of them
will need low intensity workouts, others high intensity sets. It is thus
very important, when trying to improve aerobic capacity, to schedule
each training stimulus carefully
c. While building up the aerobic capacity during the base training
period, it is likely that other conditioning components such as the
anaerobic power of sprinters or the aerobic power of middle distance
swimmers will deteriorate in quality. Therefore the coach has to

consider whether or not to insert some cycles in this long base
training period to adjust the loss in quality of the other conditioning
properties
This example demonstrates why the conditioning cannot be improved by
one single type of training and why it is a must for the coach to draw up,
well in advance, a work plan for the available time and the different
conditioning components to be trained. You cannot just make a mishmash
of all the different types of exercises and expect all elements of the
conditioning process to be covered.
So, the coach will have to draw up a timetable or plan before the start of the
season. In this plan, he fixes the important competitions and broadly
outlines “when” certain forms of training are important. He will foresee a
period of “building-up” and once the basic conditioning properties have
been developed, he will start the “fine-tuning” program to achieve the
optimal contribution of all conditioning components and so the best
possible performance in competition.

CLASSIFICATION OF TRAINING EXERCISES
Athletes, coaches, training advisers, even sports scientists often struggle
with a variety of terms to identify the same type of exercise or even use a
single term to refer to different types of exercises.
Interval training, for example, means different things to different people.
Some coaches associate “interval training” with high intensity efforts while
others extend the term to sets or repeats that are swum at threshold intensity
or even below. The terms “extensive” and “intensive” may also refer to
different characteristics of the training efforts depending upon whether they
are used in Europe or in the US and Canada. European coaches use both
terms to refer to the intensity of the training sets (respectively low intensity

and high intensity) while the Americans and Canadians rather assign these
terms to the volume of the exercise.
And, as if there was not already enough confusion, coaches often attribute
different training objectives to the same type of exercise. “Threshold
training” also called “VO2 max-training”, for example, is, in the US, mostly
used to increase VO2 max, while in Europe this type of exercise is meant to
improve the aerobic power, i.e. to maximize the use of the VO2 max in
competition. On the other hand, to improve VO2 max, some coaches choose
low intensity intervals and high mileage while others, for the same purpose,
prefer high intensity repeats.
In an attempt to remove all sources of misunderstanding, we introduced a
common coach’s language and a uniform classification of training
exercises.
This classification, presented below, contains many of the terms coaches
feel comfortable with. Each class groups the workouts with the same “class
effect”, i.e. inducing the same major biological and functional adaptation.
Designing a workout to induce just one specific biological adaptation is
impossible. Most of the time there is a major effect (= class effect) coupled
with minor effects whether desired or not.
The 4 classes with their specific class effect are:

We selected these 4 workout classes because the major training effects
(class effects) induced by each stand for:

*
the main training objectives defined during the periodization
process
*
the key biological adaptations targeted in the conditioning
program
These aspects will be of great help for:
1. the planning and periodization process. Indeed, it will allow the
coach to create a clear overall plan well in advance (fig. 65, 66,
67, 68, 70 and 71) and to translate the objectives into correct
workouts in a later stage of the training process. Once the swim
season is split into mesocycles, the coach identifies the objectives
he wants to achieve in each of them. According to these
objectives, he will then determine the frequency per week of each
of the 4 different classes of training workouts. Depending on the
swimmer’s conditioning profile the mix of the classes of exercises
will vary
2. implementing “training adjustments” after training evaluation tests
(see The Realization Phase). The records of the “times swum
during the sets” will enable the coach to check if the “execution”
of the training workouts meets the requirements of the class they
were meant for. He will so have an overall but reliable picture of
the content of each training period and be able to evaluate the
training effectiveness by considering and weighing the training
actually completed and the effects (the training, testing and
competition progress) it induced. The training for the next period
will be adjusted, i.e. the sequence, the frequency and volume of
the different classes of training exercises will be adapted
depending on the rate of success in achieving the desired training
adaptations
Moreover, this classification system also enables the coach to create freely
new training sets for each of the classes, knowing which main training
effect to expect. The coach can “unleash” his imagination, fantasy and
ingenuity to create whatever training workout he deems best. As long as the
workouts meet the requirements of the class corresponding to the planned

training objective, he can be assured that the exercise induces the training
effect he wished for.
The criteria for the classification of the training workouts are based on a
combination of scientific evidence and empirical expertise acquired after
trial and error. We have been using this approach for over 10 years and have
evaluated the outcome of different types of training workouts. We are very
confident that this classification scheme is correct and that it works. As the
book progresses we will discuss not only the physiology behind each
objective but also illustrate our experience with various examples.
Table 2 delineates how each training objective/class effect can be achieved
using the basic elements of a training exercise (volume, intensity, interval
length and rest, see The Basic Elements of a Training Exercise).

Tab. 2
Classification of training exercises according
to expected changes in aerobic and anaerobic capacity or
power (S = sprinter; up to 100m, M = medium distance; 200
to 400m, L = long distance; 800m and longer).

Aerobic Capacity Training (Endurance Capacity)

This type of exercise lays the basis for the swimmer’s conditioning and is
therefore not only essential for the long distance swimmer but also for the
sprinter. It will thus, take up the largest part of the base training period.
During the competition training period these workouts will be performed
less frequently and at a lower intensity as, during this period, their only
purpose is to maintain the acquired aerobic capacity and to counterbalance
the intensive training work (anaerobic capacity, anaerobic power or aerobic
power workouts).
Checklist for the aerobic capacity exercises:
1. high volume (for sprinters, the intervals and the total distance of
the workouts are generally shorter than for long distance
swimmers)
2. low intensity during the major part of the exercise but “spiced”
with some intensive bouts at the beginning of the workout
3. little rest between the intervals
An improvement in aerobic capacity depends to a large extent on the
biological adaptations in the slow twitch fibers. This type of muscle fiber
contains large numbers of mitochondria and oxidative enzymes.
Mitochondria are the parts of the muscle cell that supply energy by oxygen
consumption (aerobic energy). Increasing mitochondria size, density or both
through training will result in an increase in the rate of aerobic energy
supply and determine to a large extent the improvement of endurance.
Research has shown that these slow twitch muscle fibers are fully activated
even at low and medium intensities. This corroborates the finding that the
mitochondria, in these type I muscle fibers, are fully recruited to contribute
to the energy supply even at a low to medium intensity (fig. 7). Higher
training intensities will not recruit additional mitochondria in the slow
twitch fibers. However, if we want to put training stress on the

mitochondria of the oxidative fast twitch fibers, medium to high training
intensity is needed. Thus, more intensive training will not lead to a larger
training effect in the slow twitch muscle fibers but will transfer the training
stimulus to another muscle fiber group, the oxidative fast twitch fibers
(FTIIa).

Fig. 7 Recruiting patterns and biological adaptations shown by the increase
in mitochondria in the slow twitch muscle fibers and in the oxidative fast
twitch muscle fibers (FTIIa) as a function of the training intensity.
Muscle biopsy research has underlined the importance of the intensity as
well as the duration (and thus also volume or mileage) of the training
exercises for increasing the number of mitochondria (fig. 8). It was found
that the peak adaptation in mitochondria content seems to occur with
shorter but highly intensive training exercises. This indicates that short,
intense swims are very useful to raise the number of mitochondria. Thus,
not only long extensive (slow) workouts but also short, intense exercises are
essential for the improvement of the aerobic energy supply process. These
short intensive swims seem to affect the recruitment of mitochondria and
therefore focus the training stress on this part of the biological adaptation.
Long extensive workouts on the other hand, are more suitable for

improving the cardiovascular system, the homeostasis and the availability
of substrates, and to induce other non muscle specific adaptations.

Fig. 8 Influence of the duration and the intensity of the training program on
the increase of the number of mitochondria in the muscle fibers (adapted
from Dudley et al. 1982).
How can we apply these scientific findings to training practice to improve
the aerobic capacity?
1. Aerobic capacity training can only provide maximum benefit if long
swims of low intensity are “spiced” with a few intensive and short
stimuli. These “spices”:
may only be added in restricted quantity. For swimmers with
mostly slow twitch muscle fibers the quantity is strongly
restricted. For swimmers who have more fast twitch fibers, the
quality or frequency per week of short intense bouts may be
higher. The number of short intensive bouts necessary for aerobic
capacity training depends primarily on the level of anaerobic

capacity and muscle force (non-invasive indication = no biopsy),
but will ultimately be determined by a systematic and continuous
evaluation of training effects following different doses of short
intensive swims
must be scheduled in the beginning of a workout and be followed
by a long swim of low intensity
2. The intensity at which the long extensive swims have to be carried
out can be low since even low intensity provides enough stress on
the mitochondria to provoke adaptation. In other words, the
swimmer does not have to swim very fast to recruit the slow twitch
muscle fibers that are responsible for most of the aerobic capacity
Experience has taught us that we can combine short intensive repeats with
long extensive workouts in 2 ways:
First (Type I), both the intensive and extensive work take place during the
same training unit; the intensive bouts mostly in the beginning of the
exercise and the extensive part at the end (= “extensive tail” at LA1 - see
fig. 56 - or even slower). Drills, relaxation exercises or technique do not
belong to the extensive tail. For respectively poor to well trained swimmers:
✽ the total volume of the set varies from 600 to 2800 m
✽ the “extensive tail” takes up from 2/3 to 5/6 of the whole
set
Second (Type II), the extensive work happens in the training unit that
follows the intensive one. Such an intensive session may contain a long
anaerobic capacity workout, an aerobic or anaerobic power set or may be a
competition

The second example shows a way to improve the aerobic capacity through
the sequence of an intensive training unit (Day 1: built up by an anaerobic
capacity exercise and an intensive aerobic set) with only regenerative work
during the next training unit (Day 2). In this way:
*
the build-up of both the aerobic and anaerobic capacity can, to
some extent, take place simultaneously
*
even high volume regeneration work, performed at very a low
intensity, plays an important part in the building-up of the aerobic
capacity
Regeneration training strongly stimulates improvements in aerobic capacity
and should therefore be classified within the category of endurance capacity
(aerobic capacity) training. Regeneration training in one or more
consecutive training units can follow an intensive unit such as an anaerobic
capacity or power set, an aerobic power exercise or a competition. It is
always very important to give the swimmer regeneration training the day
after a competition. Besides, it is advisable to grant the swimmer a
complete day of rest (a day with no training) each week, but never the day
after a competition.
You will find more details about and guidelines for recording the different
types of aerobic capacity training in the macro-, meso- and microcycles in
chapter 9, Templates for Planning and Periodization.
Remarks:
*
Aerobic capacity training loses its effectiveness quickly if the
training stimulus is stopped or interrupted too often
*
Too much variation in stroke or type of motion (e.g. alternating
freestyle and backstroke or alternating freestyle pulling (arms alone)
and then kicking) reduces the benefit of the aerobic capacity training.
This is especially important for IM swimmers in the base training
period. At that stage of the periodization it is recommended to improve
the aerobic capacity in each stroke and to avoid medley sets. The coach
should thus select one, or at a most two strokes for his main sets

*
Focusing on the improvement of the aerobic capacity for too
many weeks results:
- in a decrease of the aerobic power
- possibly in an increase of anaerobic capacity. This
may be the reason for the decrease in aerobic power, however,
such a decrease may also occur without an increase of anaerobic
capacity

Anaerobic Capacity Training

This type of training also plays an important part in the base training period
and, to a smaller extent, in the competition training period where it is
mainly used for maintenance purposes. Preferably, these exercises are
inserted into the first half of the training session (see The Training Unit).
This type of workout lays the basis for the tough anaerobic power work that
will come up later and must therefore certainly precede the anaerobic power
sets.

Checklist for the anaerobic capacity exercises:
1. short intervals (25-50 m)
2. each repetition must be swum somewhat slower than maximum
pace for swimmers with a high anaerobic capacity, and at maximal
speed for swimmers with a low anaerobic capacity
3. the rest must be at least as long as the exertion time span,
preferably, even 2 times the exertion time
4. contrary to all other types of training, passive rest is better than
active rest
A trick to control the intensity of the anaerobic capacity sets is to insert an
all-out sprint early in the set:
if the time of this sprint is more than 1.5 sec/50 m faster than
the previous repetitions then the previous repeats were too slow and the
remaining reps have to be swum faster
if the time of this sprint is less than 1 sec/50 m faster than the
previous repetitions then the previous swims were too fast and the
remaining reps have to be swum slightly slower

It is generally held that the anaerobic capacity is, to a great extent, innately
determined. But - and this is where our findings conflict with the common
belief - we found that the anaerobic capacity can be improved by training ,
although it takes a long time (mostly 1 or 2 years or sometimes even more).
The long period required for the improvement in anaerobic capacity to
come about, may be the reason why most investigations missed it.

Moreover, not every swimmer, even with an appropriate training, manages
to increase his anaerobic capacity. As the changes in anaerobic capacity - if
they occurred - took place in swimmers older than 17 years of age, it can be
assumed that they are not related to puberty but rather to the training
process.
Thus, many of the anaerobic training exercises are planned and included in
the training program with the understanding that some changes in innate
anaerobic capacity will occur over the long- term rather than during the
current macrocycle. It is, however, possible to observe changes in anaerobic
capacity in the short-term, e.g. even during the course of a mesocycle, but
these are then more temporary fluctuations rather than intrinsic changes
(changes in the innate anaerobic capacity). We noticed, for example, that a
high weekly mileage of extensive work temporarily reduces the anaerobic
capacity. When training then shifts to less voluminous and more intensive
work, it is common to see the level of the anaerobic capacity return to its
innate level within 3 to 5 weeks. These findings on both the innate and
temporary changes in anaerobic capacity are based on our training
experience with top level swimmers but are not yet described in any
specialized literature.
Anaerobic capacity workouts:
* are usually swum in the best stroke
*
are compatible with frequency training (stroke rate training, see
Special Types of Training)
* can be used as the “spice” for the endurance capacity training; we
have indeed already seen in a previous section that the anaerobic
workouts can be used to increase both the aerobic and anaerobic
capacity
It may sound strange, but the anaerobic capacity is very important not only
for sprinters but, to another extent of course, also for long distance
swimmers. Indeed, distance swimmers mostly have an innate low anaerobic
capacity, which enables them to swim fast at long distances in competition
even with a moderate aerobic capacity. The problem for these swimmers
arises when they also swim fast in training. Due to their low anaerobic
capacity, the onset of lactate accumulation in a workout will occur at a
much higher intensity than in swimmers with the same aerobic capacity but

with a higher anaerobic capacity. The swimmers with the lower anaerobic
capacity will come much closer to their maximal aerobic and anaerobic
capacities at a subjectively easy effort and at a low measured lactate level.
Moreover, these swimmers seem to have no warning system to suggest
fatigue and will therefore “easily” swim too fast in training and break down
their anaerobic capacity even further so that the above situation becomes
exacerbated. If such swimmers, with a low anaerobic capacity, are not
forced to slow down in training or if the break down of their anaerobic
capacity is not counterbalanced with anaerobic capacity training, they are
making a beeline for overtraining.
The frequency per week and volume per set of the anaerobic capacity
training exercises is strongly determined by the quality of the individual
athlete’s anaerobic capacity. If the swimmer has a poor anaerobic capacity,
as is the case for most of the long distance swimmers, the coach has to
“administer” this type of exercise in dribs and drabs. Let us, to illustrate
this, compare a weak anaerobic capacity with thin ice. If you let a feather
fall down on thin ice nothing will happen; the ice will remain intact. If, on
the other hand, you try to walk on thin ice it will surely break. Thus, as long
as the swimmer has a low anaerobic capacity, the frequency per week and
the volume per set of this type of training has to be low (1 anaerobic
capacity training every 3rd-4th training session and between 200 and 400 m
per set). We also advise these swimmers to use mostly short fractions (25m)
and to swim all-out; e.g. 3 x (2 x 25m, 50m) each 25m start every 45s and
after each 50m 1 min rest. For swimmers with a high anaerobic capacity,
which is the case for most sprinters, the exercise will rather be 12 x 50 m
start every 1:30.
A good anaerobic capacity is thus important:
* for sprinters, to be able to swim fast on short distances
*
for long distance swimmers, but to a lesser extent, to be able to
accelerate at different times during long distance events and to better
tolerate huge training loads. Lactate tests after long distance races
revealed considerably higher lactate values for World class swimmers
than for swimmers of a regional or even national level (fig. 20). This
proves, for one thing, that anaerobic capacity is important even for
long distance swimmers and also that this anaerobic capacity will in
the end make the difference between winning and losing

Remarks:
* As the anaerobic capacity increases it will be increasingly difficult
to build up a good aerobic power
*
If a good anaerobic capacity is not coupled with a good aerobic
capacity it will be difficult to improve the aerobic and anaerobic power

Aerobic Power Training

This type of exercise is necessary to complete the training work. It will,
therefore, be principally planned during the pre-competition training period
and it should be swum in the main stroke (medley swimmers will now swim
medley and freestyle sets). From a physiological point of view, the
importance of this type of workout increases in accordance with the length
of the competition event for which the swimmer is preparing. For 100 and
200 m races, this type of training is not a must, but for races longer than
200 m it is an absolutely essential part of the pre-competition training
period.
At first sight, the aerobic power training sets do not look so difficult, but
experience has taught us, to our amazement, that elite swimmers, even the
long distance swimmers who like them very much, can “digest” them only
once or, at maximum, twice a week. This type of training seems to require a
long recovery period and is therefore very “treacherous”.
As results from this type of training should not be expected within 3 weeks,
the coach is compelled to start this type of training at least 6 weeks before
the important competition event.
Checklist for the aerobic power exercises:
1. stay around the competition distance (for a 400 m swimmer the
workout may be 500 m long and be repeated 2 or 3 times)
2. the rest is always short (5 to 15 sec) and the repeat distance is
adjusted to enable the swimmer to maintain competition speed or

just a little bit faster
3. as the swimmer gets closer to the competition, the coach will
make these swim sets progressively harder by shortening the rest
in proportion to the repeat distance. Example: in the beginning an
aerobic power series consists mainly of 50 and 100 m intervals
with 15 sec rest. In the following weeks the athlete swims longer
intervals (100 and 200 m) but with the same or less rest

As mentioned previously, the coach may use an anaerobic capacity training
exercise or a short aerobic power workout (maximum 600 m) to “spice” the
aerobic capacity training. This is especially useful at the end of the base
training period, just prior to the competition training period, to prepare for
the longer aerobic power sets that will then be done. As an example, the
coach can, near the end of the base training period, schedule a 6 x 100 m
(with 10 sec rest) to be swum at 800/1500 m competition speed, followed
by a 8 x 200 m at a very low intensity (LA1). A test competition of more
than 200 m can also replace an aerobic power set in training, something that
is often even preferred by the swimmers.
Remarks:

Aerobic power training tends to drive both the aerobic and anaerobic
capacities lower if the majority of the remaining training swims are not
slow enough. It is, therefore, very important to insert extra regeneration
work in a training week in which aerobic power sets have been planned.
The loss of anaerobic capacity, due to the aerobic power sets, is only a
problem if it is already low. If, on the other hand, the anaerobic capacity is
too high the aerobic power set will lower it to a more desirable level.

Anaerobic Power Training

This type of exercise is also used in the competition training period. The
anaerobic training at the end of the base training period is meant to increase
the ability to produce more lactate (anaerobic capacity training). The
anaerobic power training in the competition training period is a.o. used to
toughen the swimmer against acidosis. This adaptation can be completed
quite quickly (2 weeks).
While, during the pre-competition training period, the long distance
swimmers will try to improve their aerobic power, the sprinters (50 - 100
m) and middle distance swimmers (200 - 400 m) will concentrate on
increasing their anaerobic power. Compared to the aerobic power training,
which may take up to 4 weeks to show any effect, anaerobic power will
change much more quickly. Indeed, in swimmers with a moderate anaerobic
capacity, the effects of this training will be clearly noticeable after about 1017 days. In swimmers with a strong anaerobic capacity, on the other hand,
the full effect will be reached after 4 weeks focused on the anaerobic power
training followed by 2 to 3 weeks of tapering. It is advisable to split the 4
weeks of anaerobic power training into 2 x 2 weeks with 1 week of low
intensity or regeneration work in between. Anaerobic training for more than
2 consecutive weeks may carry more risks than advantages.
Checklist for the anaerobic power exercises:
1. maximum swim speed (starting with the first repetition)

2. short repeat distances; these must allow a maximum swim speed
3. very little rest (5 to 10 sec depending on the interval used - 25 or
50 m)
The total distance of an anaerobic power set is very low (125 to 250 m). For
top level swimmers, the volume can be increased to 600 m but should then
be split in sets of 100 to 200 m with 10 to 20 min rest between each set.

Training sets with repeat distances longer than 50 m and swum at maximum
speed with a lot of rest (e.g. 4 x 100 m max., Rest = 10 min) can also be
classified as anaerobic power training. These are very hard and the quality
of execution often falls off. Therefore these anaerobic power sets should be:
executed with shorter intervals (max. 75 m) and / or
reserved only for very good swimmers (sprinters and Sr.
national qualifiers)

An alternative for this type of exercise is to enter the swimmer in a local
competition and let him/her swim 3 or 4 100 m events. This may be a
greater motivation for the swimmer.
Remarks:
Similar to the aerobic power sets, this type of training tends to drive down
both the aerobic and anaerobic capacities. So, for this class of exercise, it
will also be necessary to plan, in conjunction with the anaerobic power
workouts, very long and slow swims at a very low intensity to maintain the
level of both capacities.

PARADOXICAL TRAINING EFFECTS
The 4 workout classes induce specific conditioning adaptations according to
the principle of super-compensation. This super-compensation can only be
reached if the workouts are completed in the adequate volume , with the
right intensity and at the right moment . If this is not the case, unexpected
consequences or undesirable adaptations of the conditioning will take place.
The conditioning properties that are most sensitive to these unexpected and
undesirable adaptations are the anaerobic capacity and anaerobic power. An
overdose of anaerobic work has the opposite effect of what is intended and
will break down both the anaerobic capacity and the anaerobic power
instead of building them up.
If this happened, a few weeks (generally 2 or 3 weeks but sometimes even
more, depending on the size of the previous overdose) of very extensive
(slow) or even regeneration training should be sufficient to see the
anaerobic capacity and power improve.
This sounds paradoxical but we often see:
(a)
that the exaggerated emphasis on anaerobic work in training
results in the deterioration of both the anaerobic capacity and power
(b)
subsequently a lot of extensive (low intensity) or
regeneration training with only a small amount of anaerobic training
will improve the anaerobic capacity and power
Swimmers who tend to overdo or to swim too fast in training often have
unexpectedly good competition results in the beginning of the swim season
or after being out for 2-3 weeks with an illness or an injury. However, they

will not be able to sustain or improve these performances as the season
progresses and will frequently swim as fast in training as in competition.
Similarly, the aerobic capacity often suffers from too much volume. A
stagnation or even deterioration of the aerobic capacity due to too much
mileage can quite easily be reversed by reducing the number of training
sessions a week.
As the adequate proportion and timing of the different training exercises
vary individually, the coach has to find, for each swimmer, the appropriate
moment and the right balance between frequency, volume and intensity of
the various types of workouts. Regular conditioning tests will help him to
evaluate the effects of the training and plan for each swimmer the right
training “regimen”.

DOSING OF THE TRAINING EXERCISES
The following table provides you with:
1.
a summary of the main purposes of the 4 classes of training
workouts
2. the time needed to induce stable adaptations (time necessary for
stable effects to show up)
3.
the dosing scheme for each workout class
4.
the secondary adaptations that may crop up
Considering the time necessary for the effects to show up, we, by analogy
with other physiological literature, have observed “conditioning”
improvements after a very short training period (1-2 weeks). These shortterm changes are rather due to a better neuromuscular and vascular control
(a more efficient metabolism, blood flow distribution and use of muscle
fibers) than to changes in the muscle structure and will therefore be lost
quickly with inactivity. Stable or longer lasting adaptations involve the
remodeling of the muscle, such as the enhancement of the mitochondria
content or an increase of capillaries, and require, therefore, much longer
and continuous training periods.

The “dose” of the different workouts strongly depends on:
1. the quality of both capacities
2. the training period in the conditioning program
Table 3 gives an overview of the (main) adaptations induced by the 4
classes of exercises as well as the advisable “doses” of the different types of
exercises according to the level of the aerobic (VO2 max) and anaerobic
capacities (VLamax) and the period in the training process. These are, of
course, guidelines. Depending on the way swimmers respond to the various
training structures, the dose of the different types of exercises may have to
be adapted individually. In the pre-competition training period the coach
has to pay attention to aerobic power and both capacities for a long distance
swimmer and to the anaerobic power and both capacities for the preparation
of a sprinter.
The frequencies per week are guidelines too, which means that they can be
lowered or increased depending on the changes in both capacities and
according to the training objectives. Take for example a long distance
swimmer with a high aerobic and an anaerobic capacity that is too high; his
coach could, as indicated in the table, easily plan 5 aerobic and 3 anaerobic
capacity exercises per week during the base training period. But, as the
swimmer’s anaerobic capacity proved to be far too high, it is preferable to
replace one of the anaerobic capacity workouts with an extensive long swim
to drive it down so the enhancement of an unfavorable conditioning
component can be avoided.

SPECIAL TYPES OF TRAINING
Although the exercises for technique, sprint, stroke frequency (rate), breath
control, and strength training cannot be classified into the 4 exercise
classes, their success rate is also a matter of proper timing and of the right
balance between frequency, volume, intensity, rest and repeat distance.

Technique Training
For technique training there are 2 types of exercises:
•
Type I:
technique training swims
to teach and correct the stroke pattern
•
Type II:
technique training swims
(drills) to help automate the proper stroke pattern. In other
words, the swimmer will acquire the stroke skills without
thinking (= automation)
Type I:
For this type of training the rules are fairly strict
and should be followed exactly. To be able to learn the stroke
patterns correctly the swimmer has to be fresh and fit; it is
therefore important:
*
to schedule these exercises at the beginning of the
training session, just after the warm-up
*
to ensure that the rest between the intervals is long (to
allow full recovery) and will be used by the coach to make
corrections or give feed-back to his swimmer
*
to keep the volume and the repeat distance short and the
intensity low
Type II:
For the drills intended to automate the proper
stroke pattern, volume and repeat distance should be made
progressively longer, the rest shorter and the intensity higher. Their
objective is to gradually achieve the correct form in the normal
training rhythm.

Frequency (Stroke Rate) Training
Stroke frequency (the number of strokes per minute) is a very important
component to achieve a good time in competition. Elite swimmers are

capable of reaching high frequencies as well as swimming fast at low
frequencies.
Increasing the maximum arm stroke frequency (rate) is only useful if it
makes the swimmer faster. Indeed, a swimmer will never get full benefit
from increasing his stroke frequency (rate) if he starts slipping through the
water. It is consequently important that, at any stroke frequency, he keeps
catching the water properly.
There are therefore 2 types of training exercises:
•
Type I:
drills to teach the
swimmer to swim faster while increasing his stroke frequency
•
Type II:
drills to help the
swimmer increase his maximum stroke frequency (rate)
Type I:
Requires short intervals to be swum at different
frequencies. This will automatically induce variations in intensities.
Specific tests can show at which frequencies the swimmer gets into
problems.
As the intervals will be often repeated, the volume of the
exercise will be quite high. The rest ranges between 30 sec and 1
min; the faster the swimming, the longer the rest.
If the exercise is carried out properly every increase in arm stroke
frequency (rate) must result in a faster time. If this is not the case, the
frequency (rate) should be lowered during a few repetitions. After a
moment the swimmer will again be asked to increase the stroke frequency
(rate) while swimming faster.

Remarks:
* This exercise requires an individual approach and is therefore time
consuming

*
These exercises are not advised for swimmers who still have to
improve their technique
If the stroke frequency (rate) training is carried out correctly and swum fast
enough, it can also be used as anaerobic capacity training
Type II:
As this type of stroke frequency (rate) training is
very similar to the sprint training (see below) the same rules
concerning volume, intensity, rest and interval length required to
improve the base speed will prevail here:
It is useless to start type II of the stroke frequency (rate) training if type I
has not been successfully completed. Besides, the coach has to make sure
the swimmer is strong enough to swim at higher frequencies (rates). Indeed,
boys during their growth spurt and girls in general, often lack the strength
for high frequencies (rates). They will need to improve their strength before
they can start with type II of the stroke frequency (rate) training.
Another reason to defer the start of type II may be metabolic in nature. For
example, already high lactate values at a moderate stroke rate may prevent a
breaststroke swimmer from increasing his stroke frequency (rate) even
more. The swimmer will not be able to mobilize the energy needed to
properly carry out a faster stroke. Consequently, he will need to improve his
aerobic capacity in breaststroke before starting with type II of the stroke
frequency (rate) training.

Sprint Training
The requirements for sprint training are similar to those for technique
training. It is important to distinguish between:
•
Type I:
sprint training exercises,
in the true sense of the word, to increase the base speed
•
Type II:
sprint training exercises
to train a swimmer to swim fast in a state of fatigue
Type I:
Again for this type of training the rules are fairly
strict and should be followed exactly. To be able to carry out these
exercises at maximal speed and with a correct technique, the
swimmer has to be fresh and fit; it is therefore important:

*
to schedule these exercises at the beginning of the
training session, just after the warm-up and after a few
preparatory rhythm swims
*
the rest between the intervals should be long (to allow
full recovery) and may be active
* to keep the volume and the interval length short

Type II:
If we want the swimmer to maintain a good sprint
performance in a state of fatigue, the above mentioned rules remain
valid but the sprint exercises will be planned towards the end of the
training session.

Breath Control
In this type of exercise we ask the swimmer to breathe once every x-number
of strokes. Originally it was thought that this type of training, by analogy
with altitude training, would restrict the availability of oxygen to be taken
up by the red blood cells and in doing so, it would provide an extra stimulus
for the improvement of the endurance capacity. This, however, has never
been proven experimentally. Breathing a lot or a little has no effect on the
swimmer’s aerobic conditioning. It is therefore not appropriate to label this
type of training as hypoxia training or to consider it as a surrogate to
training at altitude. The term hypoxia training has been used erroneously for
many years. It is now proper to refer to it as breath control training .
Breath control training has a favorable effect on the swimmer’s movement
in the water as well as on the technique. A swimmer’s head is just like the
rudder of a boat or the ailerons of an airplane. Every movement of the head
will influence the swimming direction as well as the position of the body in

the water. A stable position of the head during swimming reduces
unnecessary positioning changes of the body and promotes water sensitivity
and the proper execution of the stroke.
The objective of breath control training is therefore more the efficiency of
the stroke than a conditioning adaptation.

Another favorable effect of breath control training is that the swimmer
learns to swim with fewer breaths, which helps at key points in the race.
The “feeling of lack of air” leads to cramping and a stimulating urge to gasp
for air. Breath control training will help to raise the threshold of the “feeling
of lack of air” which means that the swimmer will not cramp nor gasp for
air after the turns and during the final rush to the wall. The swimmer will
also lose less velocity by maintaining a better technique.
The effect of the breath control training shows up after 8 to 14 days on a
frequency of 1 breath control exercise every 3 days. This type of exercise is
very beneficial during the last days of the pre-competition training period.

Strength Training
Strength training (ST) with weights for swimmers is a very complex and
comprehensive subject. In this section we will confine our discussion to the
classification and characterization of a few types of strength training. This
will help the coach to coordinate strength training on land with water

training (what strength training is compatible with what type of swim
training) and to plan and periodize strength training correctly (when the
different types of strength training are appropriate).

Types of Strength Training Strength training to increase maximum
force (MFST) is considered to be capacity training while strength training
to increase explosiveness (EXST) and strength training to maintain a high
force involvement for a long period (ENST) are derived from maximum
force training and are therefore labeled as power training. In table 4 you
will find an overview of the characteristics of the different types of strength
training exercises on land.

Synchronization of Dry-Land Strength Training and Swim
Training It is important to prepare the swimmers for strength training
well in advance. We therefore advise at least 1 year of conditional
gymnastics and 1 year of EXST with light weights before starting a real
strength training program as described below. The first 2 years should, thus,
be considered as an introduction to strength training, provide an adequate
basis of general strength and teach swimmers how to work correctly with
weights to avoid injuries once the “serious” work begins.
A swimmer who already has experience with strength training, will, during
the base training period of the swimming season, primarily develop his
maximal force. Indeed, maximal force must first be established before it can
be “polished” into the form the swimmer needs in competition. In the base
training period, maximal force training on land is compatible with the
training objectives (less intensive work) in the water.
Once in the pre-competition training period, which on land starts 2 or 4
weeks earlier than in water, the sprinters should concentrate on explosive
force (EXST) and to a lesser extent on endurance force strength training
(ENST). The long distance swimmers, on the other hand, will in this
training period focus on the endurance force strength training (ENST). The
volume and intensity of the workouts with paddles should also
progressively increase during the first 2 to 3 weeks of the land precompetition training period.
Strength training can be continued until 2 weeks before the main
competition, but it is advisable to reduce the load of the dry-land training
toward the end of this training period to avoid negative interference with
the intensive water work.

Composition of a Strength Training Unit

Strength training (ST)
starts, as does swim training, with a warm-up which is built up as follows:
1. some very extensive (low intensity) exercises to warm up the
muscles
2. dynamic exercises at a low to moderate intensity (cardiovascular
effect)
3. static muscle work to get the muscles ready for the high
contraction tension in the main part of the strength training unit

The main part of the ST unit consists of exercises meant to achieve the
training objectives, alternated with workouts that have a therapeutic
purpose. Both types of exercises have to be balanced not only to avoid
injuries, but, also, to achieve maximal effectiveness. In the exercises
especially chosen to meet the training objectives it is important to alternate
the active muscle groups. Moreover, “swimming propulsive” muscle groups
always have to work dynamically (isotonic), while “body stabilization”
muscle groups will work dynamically during the base training period and
statically (isometric) during the competition training period.
The strength training should end with a cool-down that includes a lot of
stretching exercises.

Training Load

There are 2 different ways to fix the load for the
different strength training exercises:
1. the loads used can be expressed in percentages of the highest weight
(%Fmax) a swimmer can lift (press, push, ...) once. For each
exercise of the ST program, the maximal weight has to be
determined by means of a maximal test
Disadvantages:
performing maximal tests is time
consuming and exposes the swimmer to
injuries

as the “strength conditioning”
improves during the swim season, it is clear
that the maximal weight a swimmer can lift
once will also evolve and that, consequently,
the maximal test will have to be repeated
regularly. This recurrence of the maximal tests
will certainly further increase the risk of
injuries and may cause negative interactions
with other training exercises or disturb the
planning proceedings

The percentages of the highest
weight (%Fmax) allocated to the ENST and
EXST exercises may significantly differ from
one swimmer to the other. Both types of ST
require, therefore, an individual assessment of
the workload. As this method uses the same
%Fmax per type of ST exercise for all
swimmers, the coach will never be sure
whether he is working with the right load or
not
2. As this first approach is too risky and time consuming, we give
preference to a safer method whereby the maximal weight is
assigned to the number of repetitions and the mode of execution

The swimmer has to carry out the 12 repetitions quickly and correctly
with the highest maximal weight. If he manages to do so, the next time
this exercise is on the program, he will have to increase the weight
slightly. If, on the other hand, the weight proves to be too heavy, he will
have to lower it and select a more appropriate load for the correct
execution of the required 12 repetitions.
For the EXST exercises the correct execution of the repetitions will limit
the maximal load. For the MFST and the ENST exercises, on the other
hand, it is the number of repetitions that will restrict it.
In this approach, the coach first selects the number of repetitions and the
mode of execution that meet the training objectives (tab. 4). He will then
choose for every exercise the weight with which the swimmer can easily
and correctly carry out the workouts. At the beginning of the strength
training period the load is, thus, set rather low but will progressively be
(from set to set) increased as the ST program progresses, providing the
number of repetitions and the mode of execution are carried out correctly.

Advantage:

this approach allows a progressive and
individualized adaptation process. It is thus
much safer and enhances the efficiency of
strength training

These are, of course, general rules. The assessment of the swimmer’s
conditioning level may lead to prescribing variants of the strength training
schedule described above.

Age Group Training
Safe and Appropriate Training In competitive swimming, it is not
unusual for young children to train a lot. But, putting a maturing body
through a strenuous or inappropriate training regime may be prejudicial:
to his health
to a continuous improvement of his performance in competition
In this chapter we will concentrate on a few important principles for safe
and constructive age group training:
1.
Avoid too many repetitions of the same movement
Studies have shown that young athletes have brittle joints, which make
them very sensitive to overload. So, too many repetitions, even at a low
intensity, may induce local complaints/injuries of the locomotor system.
These complaints do not always appear in combination with symptoms
of fatigue; it is for the coach, therefore, all the more reason to anticipate
the local locomotor strain by providing variations in the movement
patterns

The following table presents for age group swimmers the risks of injuries
linked to some specific training exercises (tab. 5).

2. The effects of the training exercises may vary according to the
biological maturity of the swimmers
The composition of the training program not only depends on the safety
of the workouts but also on the biological age of the swimmers. Indeed,
according to the biological maturity of the swimmer the training effect
may vary quantitatively (same effect but to a different extent) as well as
qualitatively (other effect)
- Quantitative variation of the training effect
For example, technique, reaction time and flexibility are well trainable at a
very young age (5 to 8 years). Successful endurance capacity training is
already possible from the age of 7. Studies revealed that 11 to 14 year old
boys are most sensitive to endurance conditioning; the greatest difference in
endurance between trained and untrained boys was namely observed just
before and during puberty (fig. 9).

Fig. 9 Difference in endurance between trained and untrained boys just
before and during puberty.
Other aspects of conditioning such as maximum force (MFST), endurance
force (ENST) and anaerobic power, are only successfully trainable from the
age of 16 for girls and 18 for boys (tab. 6).

- Qualitative variation of the training effect
Research has also shown that young athletes react differently than adults to
certain types of training, such as endurance training. That is to say that the
nature of the metabolic adaptations due to the endurance training will vary
between young swimmers and adults. These qualitative differences are
demonstrated in the following table (tab. 7).

Preparation of Young Swimmers for Future Intense and
Voluminous Training For a long-term and continuous improvement in
conditioning the swimmer has to pass through the following 4 phases, each
of them aiming at appropriate age-related training objectives.
Phase 1:
initiation and acquisition of a proper stroke
technique (start at 6 - 8 years)
The main purpose in this phase is the acquisition of a proper basic
stroke mechanism and the improvement of flexibility, reaction speed
and different coordination abilities. The aerobic capacity training
will gradually be introduced. As children of this age not only enjoy
intermittent work and variation in physical activity, but are also
susceptible to local locomotor complaints, a lot of the aerobic

capacity work is performed by means of games. Besides the
development of the aerobic capacity, these games also sustain the
improvement of the coordination abilities, reaction time and
flexibility.
In this phase the swimmer should also spend a lot of time on “non
swimming” exercises (fig. 10). This non-specific training is
extremely important and is meant to strengthen the swimmer’s
physique to help him withstand the voluminous and more intensive
build-up (phase 3) and top level training (phase 4) with the least
possible risk of injuries.

Fig. 10 Overview of the suitable types of training for the 6 to 12 year old
age group swimmers.
Phase 2:
basic training (start at 10 - 12 years)
The swimmer will spend progressively more time on his water
training (specific training) without however neglecting the nonspecific training forms. It is also time now to introduce new types of
specific workouts (fig. 11).
Phase 3:

build-up training (start at 14 - 16 years)

Fig. 11 Overview of the suitable types of training for the 10 to 16 year old
age group swimmers.
Phase 4:

top level training (start at 17-19 years)

Both phases 3 (fig. 11) and 4 (fig. 12) contain all aspects of training.
It remains important, however, to supplement the water training with
non-specific training forms and to progressively increase the training
load over the years.
For more detailed information we can advise interesting specific literature
on this subject, such as E. W. Maglischo’s Swimming Even Faster and K.
Wilke and O. Madsen’s Coaching the Young Swimmer .

Fig. 12 Overview of the suitable types of training for swimmers aged 17
and older.
The next table shows the number of training units per week of the different
types of exercises according to the swimmer’s age (tab. 8).
Instructions for the use of table 8:
1.
For age group swimmers with a high level of conditioning the
number of training units per week can be higher than indicated in table 8.
In this case we will rather increase the number of endurance capacity
sessions and only occasionally add an anaerobic capacity training unit
(see following point)
2.
The physiological profile of the swimmer rather than his
performance in competition determines the volume and frequency of the
different types of training per week. Indeed, to guarantee long- term
progression a coach should not be misled by temporary good meet
results but gear the types of training and training volume to the
swimmer’s physiological profile. Swimmers who are aerobically and
anaerobically strong, can, of course, sustain more training sessions per

week or train for a longer period than members of their peer group who
are not as strong. Nevertheless, too much training at a young age may, in
virtue of the principle of declining training return (see Declining Return
on Training Investment), leave little room for improvement as the
swimmer gets older

3.
Experiments have also shown that it is not the weekly volume
of anaerobic work but rather the number of training units per week
(frequency) in which such exercises occur, that determines the
improvement of the anaerobic conditioning. Significant anaerobic
adaptations take place even with a very low volume of anaerobic work.

This means that anaerobic training can be programmed at a young age,
but only on the condition that:
*
its volume per training session remains very low (total 100 200 m)
*
the extensive work (95% of weekly volume) is really done at a
very low intensity. Young swimmers are very motivated to swim fast or
to compete with each other during nearly every training session. If the
coach does not manage this attitude, many unexpected adaptations may
occur which could reduce the potential for improvement at a later age
and even have some adverse effects on the young swimmer’s health
swimmer’s health
Older sources in the literature advise us to start with anaerobic training at
a later age (see + in tab. 6) but, if both of the above mentioned conditions
are met, there is, in fact, no scientific/clinical reason for delaying it (see
(+) in tab. 6 and 8 above)
4.
The table is based on the chronological age of the swimmer.
However, in children, the chronological age can differ from the
biological age (maturity). It is common to see a 6 foot 12 year old boy
standing on the starting blocks next to another boy of the same age who
is only 4 1/2 feet tall. Therefore, it is the measured or estimated
biological age rather than the chronological age that will determine the
selection of the different types of exercises
5.
The frequency of the different types of training per week also
depends on the objectives of the different periods of the year plan. Both
types of strength training (ENST and EXST) will not be programmed
during the base training period but only during the competition training
period, which, as mentioned before, starts 2 or 4 weeks earlier on land
than in water, even if the swimmer is physiologically ready to handle the
workouts

Chapter 3
METABOLIC ACTIVITY
DURING SWIMMING
AEROBIC
AND
ANAEROBIC
METABOLISM:
DESCRIPTION AND SIGNIFICANCE FOR SWIM
TRAINING
The muscular system’s performance capacity is determined principally by
the amount of energy made available for muscular activity. The more
energy that is made available per second, the harder (more intensely) the
muscle can operate. If, for any reason less energy is made available, the
intensity of muscular activity will decrease, forcing the swimmer to slow
down.
The production of this energy occurs in the muscle cell and is transmitted to
the working muscle elements via ATP (adenosinetri phosphate). The
working muscle captures the energy carried by ATP, converting ATP at that
point into energy-poor ADP (adenosinedi phosphate) or AMP
(adenosinemono phosphate).
ATP is present in the muscle in only very small quantities (5.5 mmol/kg of
muscle measured while wet; Dawson 1983) and must, therefore, be
supplemented during exercise. If this does not happen, the muscle will very
quickly experience an energy deficiency, forcing the swimmer to interrupt
or slow down the exercise until sufficient energy is again available.
Three different biochemical processes can recharge energy-poor ADP to
energy-rich ATP (rephosphorylation of ADP, fig. 13). Two of these
processes can occur without requiring oxygen and are therefore called
anaerobic metabolic systems; one is the anaerobic alactic energy production
system and the other is called the anaerobic lactic energy production
system. The third reaction requires oxygen to generate energy-rich ATP. We
call this the aerobic metabolic system .

Fig. 13 Schematic representation of the 3 energy producing systems that
provide for the manufacture of energy-rich ATP.
From a metabolic point of view (assuming no interaction of technique and
body stature), swimming a best time is proportional to the total energy
(Etot) supplied by the 3 energy delivery systems.

This means that the more energy that can be delivered per second by the 3
energy systems, the better the performance in competition. It is important to
state that the highest total delivery of energy (Etot) is not automatically
obtained by maximizing the energy producing capacity of each of the 3

systems. Indeed, to achieve the highest total energy (Etot), each system has
to be trained or improved in such a way that it does not inhibit the maximal
energy delivery of the other systems.
We must also take into account that a swimmer with a better technique and
body stature (such as body length) will achieve a faster time from an equal
production of energy. Experimental research showed, for example, that the
taller the swimmer, the less aerobic energy is needed for a given speed (fig.
14).

Fig. 14 Influence of body stature on the relation between speed and aerobic
energy supply (based on data from Madsen 1982).
We must not lose sight of the fact that with every swimming exertion, the 3
energy delivery systems are activated. Even short sprints of 15 - 20 m,
which are often regarded as pure anaerobic alactic exertions, will stimulate
the other 2 systems. The contribution made by each of the 3 energy delivery
systems will vary from exercise to exercise depending on:
*
*
*

the duration of the effort
the intensity of the effort
the rest period between successive efforts

For training to be effective, it will be very important to improve each of the
3 energy supply systems with respect to:

*
*

their importance/involvement in the competition event
the swimmer’s individual trainability of each of the 3 systems

That means that “the more the better” is not valid. For example, if a long
distance swimmer trains his anaerobic capacity (breakdown of glycogen to
pyruvate) too strongly in comparison to his aerobic capacity, or if he
responds quickly to anaerobic training, the contribution from his aerobic
capacity will be reduced during long distance competition events.
Consequently, this swimmer will never be able to reach the best possible
long distance competition performance of which he is capable according to
the level of his aerobic capacity.
It is therefore important to balance the acquired capacities of the aerobic
and anaerobic energy delivery systems in order to achieve the best possible
competition performance. This will be discussed further as fine-tuning and
is an especially important issue during the pre-competition training period.
The following will describe in detail the meaning, the importance and the
trainability of the 3 energy supply systems. It is important to remember that,
as stated in the very beginning of the book (tab. 1), it is not ONLY the
conditioning that will determine the performance in competition. Indeed,
despite a high total energy supply (Etot) the competition performance will
always be restrained if the other determinant components such as technique,
mental strength, etc. are not adequately developed. A good transfer from
“internal energy” (= Etot) into “external energy”, i.e. the mechanical energy
that provides swimming speed (= function of the propulsion forces that
overcome the water resistance), is very important and will, for top level
swimmers, determine whether they win or lose. As a consequence,
technique and conditioning must both be conscientiously trained.

ANAEROBIC ALACTIC ENERGY PRODUCTION
(CREATINE PHOSPHATE SYSTEM)
Description
As mentioned above, ATP can be generated in various ways. One method of
generating energy-rich ATP consists of transferring 1 phosphate (P) from
creatine phosphate (CP) directly to the energy-poor ADP. Energy-rich ATP
is thus obtained again and only creatine (C) remains as residue. No lactate

is produced during this process and no oxygen is required. This is why this
system is called the anaerobic alactic energy system.

Compared to the other 2 energy production systems the anaerobic alactic
system or creatine phosphate system:
* delivers energy immediately
* produces the most energy per second (60 - 100 Kcal/min or 250 420 Kj/min; R. Guillet 1980)
* can work at maximum level for only a few seconds
This form of energy supply is analogous to energy that is delivered by
batteries. As soon as it is switched on, the battery provides energy. The
more energy that is required from the battery, the sooner the energy supply
will be drained. The residue, creatine or the empty battery in the example, is
rechargeable after the exercise.

Significance for Swimming
This production system is very suitable for explosive exertions, such as
short sprints or starts, which require an explosive energy supply. Since the
creatine phosphate content in the muscle is limited, it can only provide
energy for a few seconds and it will be necessary to switch fairly quickly to
another form of energy production. On average, human beings have at their
disposal between 11 and 23 mmol of creatine phosphate per kilogram of
muscle weight (Dawson 1983, Di Prampero 1981), which provides just
enough energy to sustain a maximum effort for about 4 seconds.
However, a poor sprinting speed cannot usually be traced back to a shortage
of creatine phosphate. In most cases, it should be attributed to a deficiency
in strength, coordination and technique.

Trainability - (low)
The supply of creatine phosphate depends on the bulk of muscle and the
type of muscle fiber. The fast twitch muscle fibers contain more creatine
phosphate than the slow twitch muscle fibers (fast twitch: 22.0 + 2.0 and
slow twitch: 13.2 + 1.3 mmol/kg measured while wet, Meyer 1982). A large

quantity of fast twitch fibers per kg of muscle thus implies a greater amount
of creatine phosphate per kg of the total muscle weight.
To what extent training can change the proportion between fast twitch and
slow twitch muscle fibers still remains a heated point of debate. It is known
that the type of muscle fiber is determined by the maximum frequency of
stimuli discharged to the muscle by the motor-neuron during an exertion
(Freund 1983, Staron 1997, Stephens 1977). Fast twitch fibers have motorneurons that can stimulate the muscle with very high frequencies while the
motor-neurons of the slow twitch muscle fibers maintain rather low
maximum frequencies.
Sending high frequencies of nerve impulses to the muscle via
electrostimulation can, over a period of several weeks, make slow twitch
fibers evolve into fast twitch fibers (Bacou 1996, Barjot 1998, Buchthal
1980). However, it should be noted that, when the new fast twitch muscle
fibers return to the control of their proper motor-neurons, which are only
able to send muscle stimulation impulses at a low frequency, they revert
once again to slow twitch fibers. Furthermore, because of the fact that most
motor-neurons can barely be urged to vary their frequency pattern, the “new
fast twitch fibers” are not going to use their newly acquired capacities
(explosiveness, etc.) and are, in time, going to revert back to slow twitch
fibers.
There exists only a small percentage of motor-neurons which can be trained
to alter their maximum stimulation frequency. If we wish to increase the
reserve of creatine phosphate we will have to rely upon a subgroup of the
fast twitch muscle fibers (the fast twitch oxidative fibers or fast twitch
muscle fibers that utilize oxygen) which can be stimulated by this small
percentage of motor-neurons.
Another possibility to increase the CP reserve is to increase muscle mass.
However, as long as the proportion between slow twitch and fast twitch
muscle fibers remains the same, the quantity of creatine phosphate per kg of
muscle also remains unchanged and, as a result, we can expect only a slight
return. An improvement in performance via an increase in muscle bulk can
often be traced back to a gain in strength, which in the water can be
converted into speed. This, however, can be expected only as long as the

disadvantages of an increase in muscle bulk do not offset the gain in
strength.

ANAEROBIC LACTIC ENERGY PRODUCTION
Description
Once ADP can no longer be recharged sufficiently by creatine phosphate
into ATP, more and more energy-poor ADPs will be available. These ADP
molecules will activate the 2 remaining systems for delivering energy.
We will start to discuss the system that as first and without using oxygen
(anaerobic) is going to convert energy-poor ADP into energy-rich ATP.
In the initial phase glycogen (= carbohydrates which are stored in the liver
and in the muscle) is broken down into pyruvate. For each pyruvate that is
liberated in this process, a very small quantity of energy (used to form ATP)
is released. Since this process occurs very quickly and in many locations
simultaneously, the total quantity of energy production per second is high
(lower than that of the anaerobic alactic system but much higher than that of
the aerobic energy supply system). Glycogen is the only fuel that can be
used for this process, which is, therefore, called glycolysis (from the Greek
“lysis” which means to break down).
In a second phase , pyruvate will accumulate if not enough oxygen is
available to eliminate it. This accumulation indirectly slows the activity of
the glycolysis (the initial phase). In order to prevent this inhibition,
pyruvate is converted to lactate. Because lactate is produced, this anaerobic
system is called the anaerobic lactic system.

Considering both phases as the anaerobic lactic energy supply, it:
produces energy almost immediately

produces lactate in addition to energy at higher activity levels
produces less energy per second than the creatine phosphate
system, but more energy per second than the aerobic system
(about 2-3 times faster than the aerobic system)
may weaken during long lasting efforts or high volume training if
the glycogen supply becomes low
is provisioned only by glycogen/carbohydrates
In contrast with the creatine phosphate energy delivery system, which does
not exert any negative influence on the other 2 systems, the production of
lactate is going to lead to acidification, which, if it becomes too strong, will
significantly hinder further energy production. The acidosis will block the
activity of important enzymes that enable the glycolysis to take place and,
as a result, reduce the energy provided by the glycolysis. The athlete will
then no longer have enough energy at his disposal to continue his exertion
with the same intensity and he will have to slow down.
The acidosis depends strongly on the rate (= quantity per second) at which
pyruvate is converted into lactate. At a low rate of conversion, the acidosis
can easily be neutralized by the buffer capacity of the muscle cell. At a high
rate of conversion, the buffer capacity of the muscle cell will no longer be
able to counter that acidosis and the intra-muscular pH will decrease. At
this stage, the acidosis becomes so pronounced that it will reduce further
glycolysis activity and, consequently, the energy production by this system.
Considering figure 13, it becomes obvious that there are 2 possible reasons
for an excess of pyruvate that causes a high rate of conversion to lactate:
1. pyruvate is not sufficiently eliminated by oxidation because
the aerobic energy supply system is insufficiently developed
2. the production of pyruvate is very high
Moreover, this figure also makes clear that a very high capacity to produce
pyruvate (= the anaerobic capacity) is of practically no benefit if the
capacity of the aerobic energy supply system to use pyruvate (= the aerobic
capacity) is too low. In such a situation, one will very quickly, and even at
low levels of glycolytic activity, achieve a high accumulation of pyruvate,
which will, even at a low swimming speed, inevitably induce a high
conversion of pyruvate to lactate and a high acidosis.

Once again, to achieve the best possible performance in competition, the
aerobic and anaerobic capacity must both be well-balanced. The idea “the
more the better” is not valid with respect to the anaerobic capacity.

Significance for Swimming
The anaerobic lactic energy delivery system could be thought of as an
auxiliary system; this system takes care of an energy shortage when the
body has insufficient energy at its disposal to continue the intensity of the
exercise. The percent of energy contributed by the anaerobic lactic system
is largely determined by the duration of the maximal effort.
The longer the competition distance, the more careful the swimmer must be
not to induce an acidosis that will slow down the further release of energy.
The swimmer is thus forced to use his anaerobic lactic energy supply
system at a low extent in order to avoid a reduction of the energy
supply/swimming speed during the race. In a short competition event, a
“collapse” of the energy supply/swimming speed can occur sooner provided it does not happen before the end of the race -. Therefore a
sprinter can use his anaerobic lactic energy supply system much more
without the risk of a break down during the race.
For a 100 m race, a fast swimmer will have no problems with the onset of
acidosis curtailing further energy supply if it occurs after 50 seconds. But if
the same swimmer’s lactic system is utilized at the same intensity during a
200 m event, the “collapse” of his energy supply/swimming speed will
happen too early and will cause him great difficulty in the second half of the
race; the swimmer will almost inevitably “die” before he gets to the wall.
The real art in competition is choosing the swimming speed that will
involve the anaerobic lactic system as much as possible without inducing
the early (before the end of the race) onset of acidosis that will slow the
release of energy.
The longer the distance, the less one can use the anaerobic lactic system.
Therefore, the longer the distance in competition for which a swimmer is
preparing, the less this system needs to be developed. This does not mean
that long distance swimmers do not need to develop their lactic system.
Experimental data (fig. 20) show that top distance swimmers utilize the
lactic energy supply system better than less talented distance swimmers.

The shorter the race, however, the more important it is for a swimmer to
develop a strong anaerobic lactic performance capacity and the more time
has to be spent on building up this capacity.

Trainability (medium)
The most crucial step for increasing the anaerobic lactic energy supply is to
improve the capacity to produce pyruvate. This capacity is referred to as the
“anaerobic capacity”. It may be somewhat confusing that we do not include
the anaerobic alactic energy supply into the anaerobic capacity. However,
since the trainability of the anaerobic alactic system is very limited, and
since its contribution to the competition performance ranges from low to
very low (perhaps with the exception of a 50 m sprint), it is for practical
reasons that we use the name “anaerobic capacity” to label the athlete’s
capacity to produce pyruvate.
Since the conversion from pyruvate into lactate and vice versa occurs very
quickly, the ratio between the muscle concentrations of lactate and pyruvate
is described as being 1/1. You may therefore find in literature on the subject
the label “production of lactate” for what we refer to as “the production of
pyruvate”. You may further find that the units of the anaerobic capacity are
expressed in “mmol of lactate per liter and per second” instead of “mmol of
pyruvate per liter and per second”. This may sound confusing but is in fact
quite simple since they are counterparts.
In this book, the label “anaerobic capacity” reflects the capacity to produce
pyruvate and will, based on the 1/1 ratio between lactate and pyruvate, be
expressed accordingly in mmol of lactate per liter and per sec.
As previously mentioned, the most crucial step in increasing the anaerobic
lactic energy supply, is improving the anaerobic capacity. This capacity
becomes even more important if one’s aerobic capacity increases. An
increase in aerobic capacity will eliminate more pyruvate and therefore a
higher production of pyruvate (anaerobic capacity) will be required to
achieve a certain blood lactate concentration after exercises. We observed
that, to attain 4 mmol/l of lactate in the blood, well endurance trained World
class swimmers produced about 20 - 25% more pyruvate than regional level
swimmers (fig. 53).

The anaerobic capacity varies greatly from athlete to athlete. The share of
the different types of muscle fibers in athletes strongly determines their
anaerobic capacity. Fast twitch muscle fibers show higher glycolysis
activity and can produce far more lactic energy than the slow twitch muscle
fibers. An athlete with proportionally more fast twitch muscle fibers is thus
able to achieve a higher anaerobic capacity and to produce more
lactate/pyruvate than an athlete possessing predominantly slow twitch
muscle fibers.
Because training can exert only limited influence on the original proportion
of fast twitch and slow twitch muscle fibers, it has been believed until
recently that:
the anaerobic capacity can only be improved to a small extent
the only benefit of the anaerobic workouts is the achievement of
high blood lactate values in competition (anaerobic power
training)
However, new data show that over years some swimmers made some
amazing improvements in their anaerobic capacities. These swimmers were
17 years of age or older when they were first tested and were followed for
at least 4 years. During that time, their training programs were continually
adjusted to stimulate the enhancement of their anaerobic capacity.
Although it takes years to increase anaerobic capacity, it can easily be
reduced in a short time. A high volume training program that consists
almost exclusively of long extensive (low intensity) endurance exercises
over the course of 1 or 2 weeks will suppress the swimmer’s anaerobic
capacity. The swimmer will lose explosiveness and the capacity to
accelerate during races of more than 50 m. Performance in short sprints (25
m or less) normally remains the same. If these short sprints become slower,
it is usually not due to a weakened anaerobic lactic capacity, but rather to a
decline in technical skill, muscle strength or neuromuscular fitness. The
anaerobic capacity can be brought back to innate levels through anaerobic
capacity training.
After a long and extremely extensive training period, swimmers will often
experience difficulties in completing and tolerating short intensive swims.
Lactate tests do indeed reveal an increase in swimming speed at low
concentrations of lactate, but the lactate readings after a race drop off

considerably. Competition performances over short distances are, therefore,
generally disappointing. Through simulation it can be shown that faster
swimming at low concentrations of lactate is not the result of improved
endurance, but rather of the weakened capacity to produce lactate
(anaerobic capacity).
A similar drop in anaerobic capacity can also be found when one trains
anaerobically too often and too long (volume of set). This is more a result
of not getting enough rest to reach super-compensation rather than of an
incorrect choice of intensity. In this situation, the swimmer often also loses
aerobic capacity, but after a rest period of 1 or 2 weeks both his aerobic and
anaerobic capacities will return to their normal level.

AEROBIC ENERGY PRODUCTION
Description
When an increase in energy-poor ADPs activates the anaerobic system to
produce energy, it also activates the aerobic system at the same time. As the
word “aerobic” indicates, oxygen (O2 ) is involved with this system.
The maximum amount of energy provided by this aerobic energy delivery
system is proportional to the maximum uptake of oxygen (or in other
words, to the maximum use of oxygen = VO2 max). The swimmer’s
maximal capacity to provide energy in this way is called the aerobic
capacity.
Fats and proteins as well as carbohydrates (namely pyruvate from
glycolysis) are used as fuel for the production of new energy that converts
ADP to ATP. The waste products of this process are carbon dioxide (CO2 )
and water (H2 O).

The specific characteristics of this system are:
* a limited production of energy per second compared with the other
two sources of energy (15 - 20 Kcal/min or 63 - 84 Kj/min, R. Guillet
1980)
* a very prolonged release of energy
* its waste products have virtually no negative influence on the other
two energy processes
*
sluggish run-in time before the system contributes to maximum
delivery of energy during exercise (about 50 - 90 seconds depending
on the intensity of the exercise)
All of the factors that have an influence on the transport of oxygen are also
going to influence the capacity of the aerobic system to produce energy.
Therefore, the aerobic capacity will be positively influenced by:
*
a very extensive network of blood capillaries (the network of the
smallest blood vessels) in and around the muscle
*
an increased level of hemoglobin (i.e. an increased number of
oxygen carriers in the bloodstream; standard values are 14.5 mg% for
women and 15.5 mg% for men)
*
an increased cardiac output (i.e. the product of heart rate and
stroke volume)
* a more efficient intake of oxygen in the muscle through myoglobin

Significance for Swimming
As a result of the above characteristics this energy delivery system is very
suitable for prolonged exertions (delivers energy for an extended period of

time, with no negative waste products, etc.). The better the aerobic system
is developed, the more oxygen can be used and the faster one can swim
during prolonged exercises. The aerobic capacity is therefore the major
factor determining performance in long distance events.
Nevertheless, the amount of energy that is released by the aerobic system
per second will never be as great as the amount of energy that can be
produced by both anaerobic energy delivery systems. Since the contribution
of both anaerobic energy systems decreases during long efforts, it is never
possible to swim as fast during prolonged efforts as during short exertions.
Does this mean that a sprinter does not need a well-developed aerobic
system?
It is a common belief that sprinters do not need the same maximum aerobic
capacity as long distance swimmers. But nothing is further from the truth
(except perhaps for a 50 m sprint). Sprinters must possess a strong aerobic
capacity, even as strong as that of long distance swimmers. This is
confirmed by:
* experimental research comparing top level sprinters with top class
long distance swimmers
*
the simulation program that indicates the underlying processes of
aerobic and anaerobic capacity that are necessary to realize a top
performance
It can now be stated that sprinters (100 m-swimmers) are more complete
athletes than long distance swimmers. World class sprinters must combine a
superb aerobic capacity with a superb anaerobic capacity. In contrast, top
long distance swimmers are able to attain World class performances with a
strong aerobic capacity in combination with a lower anaerobic capacity. It
can be concluded that the better the sprinter’s aerobic capacity, the better
the results he can expect in competition.
There is also another reason for swimmers in all events to achieve a strong
aerobic capacity. Indeed, a good level of aerobic capacity speeds up the
regeneration process between intensive workouts.
As a consequence for training, the better one regenerates from an intensive
workout, the more frequently he can perform specific intensive exercises in
a training cycle without any risk of overtraining. With respect to

competition, faster regeneration will allow the swimmer to achieve several
consecutive top performances within a few days. This becomes more and
more important with the introduction of semi-finals between preliminary
and final heats in competition.
Furthermore, a high aerobic capacity speeds up:
* the reconstruction of creatine phosphate from creatine (this process
takes place immediately after the exertion)
* the elimination of lactate
Swimmers with a well-developed aerobic capacity are going to eliminate
lactate more quickly both during and after the exertion.

This finding is of great importance for handling and interpreting the lactate
readings and for determining training intensities, training goals and training
adjustments (see Blood Lactate).
Nevertheless, the return of the concentration of lactate to resting levels
cannot be equated with a complete recovery. It so happens that many other
recovery processes are required before we can speak of a complete
recuperation. Thus, stiffness of the muscles, for example, days after serious
exertion must be attributed, not to lactate remaining in the muscle, but
rather to an incomplete recovery of the biological structures.

Trainability (high)
The aerobic system is the most trainable of the 3 energy delivery processes.
The biological adaptations that go hand in hand with an improvement in
aerobic capacity (increase in the maximum intake of oxygen) are very
complex and take place slowly. In planning, therefore, it is necessary to
allow sufficient time for building up the aerobic capacity (at least 8 weeks).
Building up the aerobic capacity requires quite a lot of extensive work (see
Classification of Training Exercises). Since the anaerobic capacity is a very
important provider of fuel for the aerobic energy supply system, it is
important to keep this anaerobic capacity at an appropriate level. Too much
volume and too extensive (low intensity) workouts may decrease the
anaerobic capacity to a level that does not provide enough fuel from
carbohydrates to the aerobic energy supply. In such a situation, other
sources of fuels, such as fat or proteins, will be broken down in order to
provide fuel for the aerobic energy supply system.
For long distance swimmers who have to compete in races of more than 1.5
hours, using fuels other than carbohydrates may be of great benefit. For the
classic long distance swimming events (up to 1500 m), there is no real
benefit to train the athlete for switching from carbohydrates to fat or
proteins. This means that, for these classic events, we will always need a
sufficiently well developed anaerobic capacity in addition to a welldeveloped aerobic capacity.
We will, therefore always, even in the base training period of a season,
combine short intensive workouts and long extensive swims in order to
improve the aerobic capacity.
Experience has taught us that aerobic capacity training can very easily be
combined with sprint training and with strength training that is focused on
the improvement of maximal muscular force (see Strength Training). The
negative interaction of extensive (slow) endurance training on sprint speed
and explosiveness can then be minimized and the stroke frequency (rate) as
well as the sprinting speed can be largely maintained.
In order to monitor the level of the anaerobic capacity, lactate readings will
be used to feed a simulation program that calculates the status of the
anaerobic capacity. Other observations such as a decrease of the swimmer’s

sprinting speed (max. 25 m) and stroke frequency (especially important in
breaststroke) despite sufficient regeneration from the voluminous work,
may indicate that the anaerobic capacity is decreasing.

METABOLIC ACTIVITY DURING REST
In a state of rest the 3 energy delivery systems provide the energy necessary
to live (fig. 15). When human beings breathe, they use little oxygen (about
200 - 300 ml/min). The low lactate readings (between 1 and 2 mmol/l) at
rest indicate that only a small amount of energy is produced by the
anaerobic lactic metabolism.
The total amount of energy produced at rest is needed for the cardiac and
lung work but also for repairing and restructuring cell compounds in order
to guarantee the good functioning of the human organism. The metabolic
activity providing this energy is called the “rest or basal metabolism”.
The creatine phosphate system is fully loaded and ready to supply energy
for any onset of activity.

Fig. 15 In a state of rest the 3 energy delivery systems provide as much
energy as human beings need to live. The low organic activity is

represented by the small cogwheels while the low energy production of the
aerobic and anaerobic lactic systems is represent

METABOLIC ACTIVITY DURING COMPETITION
At the beginning of a race, the delivery of energy is immediately covered by
the anaerobic alactic metabolism (the creatine phosphate system = CP).
Even before this energy system is exhausted (40 - 60% of CP energy is still
available), the aerobic metabolism is activated (fig. 16). But because this
aerobic energy delivering system is a slow starter it cannot provide the
energy necessary to sustain a maximum effort. This means that the third
system, the anaerobic lactic metabolism, will come into operation and, in
time, lactate will accumulate in the muscle. Some of this lactate will be
burned up by the aerobic system and deliver energy. The remaining lactate
stays in the muscle or flows gradually into the bloodstream, where the
concentration of lactate increases.

Fig. 16 Schematic representation of the activation of the 3 energy supply
systems at the beginning of a maximal effort (see text).

The intensive action of the lactic system causes acidosis in the muscle. In
order to avoid the damaging results of excessive acidosis, the activity of the
anaerobic lactic system will decrease as the acidosis increases (fig. 17),
reducing the delivery of energy and the swimming speed.
To limit excessive acidosis and thus to minimize the sharp reduction in
speed, it is important for the swimmer to spread out and balance his efforts
across the entire distance of the race. The duration of the effort will,
therefore, also strongly determine the contribution of the anaerobic lactic
system.

Fig. 17 Schematic representation of the activation of the 3 energy supply
systems at the end of a maximal effort.
For sprinters, it is estimated that about 50% of the total delivery of energy
during a 100 m competition event comes from the anaerobic lactic system
(fig. 18). The remaining 50% consists of creatine phosphate and aerobic
energy.
For long distance swimmers, on the other hand, the anaerobic lactic
contribution is lower and the amount of energy contributed by their aerobic

and creatine phosphate systems may increase to about 65%. Since the
creatine phosphate share for efforts over 50 seconds is small, the shift from
50% to 65% comes about principally through a greater contribution by the
aerobic delivery of energy.
The type of the swimmer (sprinter or long distance swimmer), thus, has an
influence on the percentage of aerobic and anaerobic energy delivery.

Fig. 18 Contribution of the anaerobic lactic (bottom) and the alactic
(aerobic + anaerobic alactic) energy delivery during competition efforts
over 50 to 1500 m for sprinters, middle distance and long distance
swimmers (3000 m is a maximal test in training).
The swimmer’s performance level (international as opposed to regional
level), on the other hand, has virtually no influence on the percentage of
alactic (aerobic + CP energy) versus lactic energy delivery during
competition (fig. 19).
As the competition distance increases, the share of aerobic energy
contributed also increases, while the percentage of energy delivered by
means of lactate production decreases. From a competition distance of 800

m upwards, the shares of lactic and alactic energy used are practically the
same for sprinters and long distance swimmers.

Fig. 19 Contribution of the anaerobic lactic (bottom) and the alactic
(aerobic + anaerobic alactic) energy delivery during competition efforts
over 50 to 1500 m for swimmers of regional, national, European or World
class level.
As the variation in the alactic (aerobic + anaerobic alactic) and the lactic
energy supply in an 800 m race is very small, an extra contribution of lactic
energy will often determine who wins and who loses. This is why the best
swimmers (European and World class swimmers) reach the highest lactate
readings even over long distances (fig. 20).

Fig. 20 Maximal concentrations of lactate measured at races from 50 to
1500 m for which swimmers of World class, European, national and
regional level were specifically prepared
Furthermore, sprinters reach higher lactate readings than the middle and
long distance swimmers in shorter events (fig. 21). When sprinters
participate in competitions over longer distances, they are no longer able to
activate their energy systems in a balanced way. Indeed, due to their high
anaerobic capacity, lactate will quickly accumulate in the muscle and lead
to an excessive acidosis even at a low level of their maximal oxygen uptake
(VO2 max = aerobic capacity). So, even at a low share of their aerobic
capacity, they will be forced to slow down. The production of pyruvate
(anaerobic capacity) will decrease and in spite of having the capacity to
produce a large amount of lactate, they will, at the end of the race, have
lower blood lactate readings than the long distance swimmers. Of course,
these sprinters could start slower to avoid an excessive muscular acidosis
and, as a result, reach the same lactate values as the long distance
swimmers, but they would then have to swim at a submaximal level of both
their aerobic and anaerobic capacities, which is certainly not conducive to
good performances

Fig. 21 Maximal lactate concentrations measured at races from 50 to 1500
m for sprinters, middle distance and long distance swimmers.
Since the maximal lactate concentration is physiologically limited, it is
extremely important that swimmers be able to swim fast even at low
concentrations of lactate. Referring to the metabolic scheme (fig. 13), this
implies that more pyruvate must be absorbed by the aerobic energy supply
system instead of being converted to lactate. We have actually observed that
swimmers who achieve the best results in competition also swim fastest at
low concentrations of lactate. This principle is valid for both short (fig. 22)
and longer (fig. 23) swimming distances.
This points to the fact that, in swimming, endurance (= having a strong
aerobic capacity - VO2 max) has a very strong effect on the results in
competition. For the distance swimmers this seems of course obvious, but
the same principle is also valid for the sprinters.

Fig. 22 The swimmers with the best competition results over 100 m achieve
the fastest times at low lactate concentrations (2-Speed test, see Standard
Lactate Test).

Fig. 23 The swimmers with the best competition results over 400 m achieve
the fastest times at low concentrations of lactate (2-Speed test, see Standard
Lactate Test).
Exceptions to this principle are possible if the swimmer can compensate for
his lack of endurance by reaching higher levels of lactate (fig. 24). This

compensation, however, is limited.

Fig. 24 Swimmer A achieves a faster time in competition than swimmer B
because swimmer A compensates for a slower swimming speed at low
lactate concentrations by reaching higher maximum lactate levels in
competition (2-Speed test, see Standard Lactate Test).

However, it would be too simplistic to assume that the coach’s job consists
only of improving both the swimmer’s aerobic and anaerobic capacities.
Indeed, the aerobic and anaerobic capacities need to be developed in
exactly the right proportion to each other in order to achieve the best
performance in competition.
Examples:

A distance swimmer with an anaerobic capacity that is too
high cannot activate his aerobic (endurance) capacity to its highest
level.
Result: he has a weak aerobic power and, despite a good aerobic capacity,
he will register poor performances in long distance competitions
A sprinter with an aerobic capacity that is too low will go
into acidosis more quickly and will therefore not be able to activate
his anaerobic capacity to its highest level.
Result: He will have a weak anaerobic power. A better aerobic capacity
would enable him to burn more pyruvate instead of converting it to
lactate and thus delay the acidosis in the muscle cell. With the same
anaerobic, but a higher aerobic capacity, he would be able to better utilize
his anaerobic capacity (higher anaerobic power) and, as a result, perform
better in short events
Adjusting both the aerobic and anaerobic capacities to one another (finetuning) is one of the main objectives of the pre-competition training period.
However, in order to achieve a maximal training effect the coach should
also consider:
the quality of the swimming technique
the swimmer’s level of endurance and explosive force
Example:
If during the pre-competition training period a coach observes, a
breaststroke swimmer experiencing a loss of movement efficiency
(technical problem) at higher stroke frequencies, it is too late to adjust
technique. But, because the quality of the anaerobic capacity supports high
stroke frequencies, it may then be of great benefit to “sacrifice” some
anaerobic capacity and power training in favor of aerobic capacity and
frequency exercises. For a “strong butterfly swimmer” on the other hand,
such a fine-tuning would be fatal as he needs a very strong anaerobic power

to benefit from his strength. For him we would rather sacrifice some aerobic
capacity and power training to strive for maximal anaerobic power.

METABOLIC ACTIVITY DURING TRAINING EXERCISES
Continuous Swimming
This type of exercise consists of at least 15 min continuous swimming and
is especially useful in combination with short intensive workouts to
improve the aerobic capacity.
The activation mechanism of the energy supply systems is the same as in
competition:
* first the anaerobic alactic metabolism is activated
*
the aerobic metabolism starts about half-way through the energy
reserve of the anaerobic alactic system
* if the intensity (swimming speed) requires more energy than both
systems can supply, the anaerobic lactic metabolism will contribute to
make up the shortfall
As pointed out in the description of the anaerobic lactic metabolism, the
maximal involvement of this system is strongly determined by the duration
of the effort. The input of the anaerobic lactic system will therefore be
limited during this type of long duration exercise. Indeed, according to the
swimming speed maintained during the exercise, about 87 to 97% of the
energy is provided by the aerobic metabolism.
The highest continuous swimming speed that can be maintained during this
effort also represents an estimation of the swimmer’s endurance and can
therefore be used to fix the training intensity of endurance sets for every
swimmer individually (see The 30-Minute Test).

Lactate Steady State

Nearly all types of continuous swimming sets
lead to a “steady state” in the activity of the 3 metabolic processes:

*
the oxygen uptake and the activity of the 2 anaerobic processes
remain constant
*
once this steady state of the 3 systems has set in it can be
maintained during the entire exercise
There will be a slight increase in the lactate concentration in the beginning
of the exercise at very low submaximal swimming speeds. Within the first 5
minutes, however, the oxygen uptake will increase, steadily reducing the
supply of energy by the anaerobic lactic system causing the lactate
concentration in the blood to drop. At this point, a balance between the
production and elimination of lactate sets in, causing the blood lactate
concentration to remain constant during the course of the exercise and so to
enter a steady state (fig. 25).

Fig. 25 As long as the swimming speed leads to a balance between lactate
production and lactate elimination, it is possible to reach a lactate steady
state (see text).
When the swimmer swims slightly faster, the lactate will also increase in
the beginning of the exercise, but after about 5 to 7 minutes it will again
settle into a lactate steady state. The lactate concentration during this

exertion, however, will be higher than during the slower exercise. Thus,
depending on the swimming speed, a lactate steady state can be attained at
different lactate concentrations.
At even faster speeds the swimmer will reach a point where the lactate
concentration will not remain constant, but instead will increase steadily. At
this swimming speed, there is no longer a balance between lactate
production and lactate elimination, the lactate production being higher than
the lactate elimination. This causes the lactate to accumulate progressively
and no longer leads to a lactate steady state. The highest lactate value that
remains constant is called the maximum lactate steady state (MaxLass ) or
lactate threshold. We have found lactate steady states up to 6 mmol/l,
although the maximum level differs greatly from one athlete to another.
Long distance swimmers have, on average, a lower maximum lactate steady
state than sprinters. S.P., a World class long distance swimmer from
Germany, for example, had a MaxLass lactate concentration of 2.5 mmol/l,
while we once registered a MaxLass value of 9.3 mmol/l in a sprinter.
Not only in the world of swimming, but also in many other sports the
hypothesis has, for quite some time, been put forth that training at the
maximal lactate steady state was the magic and optimal method to improve
the athlete’s endurance (aerobic capacity/power). However, nothing is
further from the truth. The components that make up an athlete’s endurance
are very complex and it is fantasy to think that just one single intensity is
capable of developing all of the different components that are necessary for
its improvement. Thus, the aerobic metabolic performance of an athlete has
to be built up by means of different types of exercises and at different
swimming speeds. Continuous swimming is one of those types of workouts
that can be used to build up an athlete’s endurance.

Interval Swimming
In this type of exercise the total distance is interrupted by periods of rest.
Interval sets can be used:
*
*
*

to improve the aerobic and anaerobic capacity and power
as sprint training
as frequency training (stroke rate training; see Frequency Training)

Interval sets will be composed differently depending upon whether their
objective is to affect the aerobic or anaerobic processes. The balance
between rest, volume and intensity of the workout will determine to what
extent both metabolic systems will be activated. By changing the balance
between those different training elements (rest, volume and intensity) you
can gradually move through the 4 types of exercises (fig. 26).

Fig. 26 Schematic representation of the transition to different types of
swimming sets according to swimming speed (intensity), rest and total
distance (volume). AEC = aerobic capacity, ANC = anaerobic capacity,
AEP = aerobic power, ANP = anaerobic power.
You can enhance the anaerobic character of an exercise by:
* increasing the swimming speed (intensity) and/or
* increasing the rest periods (the rest is passive) and shortening the
repeat distances (intervals)
The last method strongly involves anaerobic metabolism at the beginning of
the exercise with only a low involvement of the aerobic system. It is
therefore very suitable for swimmers with a low anaerobic capacity, such as
the majority of the long distance swimmers. Indeed, these swimmers often

run the risk of overloading their aerobic capacity system by swimming too
fast too often in training. Moreover, the total volume of the workout will
decrease as the intensity rises.
Aerobic and anaerobic power training sets are always characterized by short
rest periods (5 to 15 sec) but differ in total volume. The aerobic power
exercises require a high total volume whereas the anaerobic power
workouts are already very effective at a low total distance (maximum 600 m
per training unit).
The rest period of the exercise will not change according to the level of the
swimmer. The swimming speed (intensity) and the total volume, on the
other hand, will depend strongly on the swimmer’s aerobic capacity: the
better the aerobic capacity, the faster and the longer the repeat set can be.

Aerobic Intervals

Building up the endurance (aerobic capacity and
power) requires a sustained training stimulus on the same muscle group,
which automatically implies high volume, submaximal intensities, little rest
and little variation.
The aerobic training exercises serve principally to activate the aerobic
energy supply system and, to a much lesser extent, the anaerobic lactic
metabolism. If the swimming speed of the aerobic training exercises is too
high, the swimmer runs the risk of ruining his super-compensation, of
inducing unwanted adaptations, and even possibly of impeding the effect of
other training swims. Moreover, if endurance training is swum too fast, the
swimmer will not be able to continue increasing the intensity when it
becomes really necessary to do so.
Depending on the type of swimmer, we can expect lactate values for the
aerobic capacity and power training between 1 and 2.5 mmol/l, and 2 and 7
mmol/l respectively. For swimmers with a good aerobic and/or a weak
anaerobic capacity, it is recommended to remain at low lactate values. For
these swimmers, lactate values of 2 mmol/l can already represent the same
metabolic stress as 5 mmol/l for swimmers with a weak aerobic and a
strong anaerobic capacity.
Calculations revealed that, in order to achieve 3 mmol/l lactate values
during different aerobic interval exercises (fig. 27), a well endurance trained
swimmer (speed at 4 mmol/l lactate on 400 m = 1.5 m/s, i.e. 4:26.7) has to

provide 25% more anaerobic lactic energy than a less endurance trained
athlete (speed at 4 mmol/l lactate on 400 m = 1.333 m/s, i.e. 5:00.0).
Moreover, the rate of the anaerobic lactic energy supply increases as the
intervals of the sets lengthen but hardly ever changes as the rest period
increases from 10 to 30 sec, even if the swimmer has to swim faster to
reach 3 mmol/l. The percentage of the total energy provided by the
anaerobic lactic system remains nearly the same for all sets swum at 3
mmol/l whereas the percentage of the aerobic and anaerobic alactic system
respectively decreases and increases as the interval of the sets shortens.

Fig. 27 Swimming speed (intensity; m/s), rate of lactate production
(mmol/l/min) and partition of the total energy (%Wtot ) in anaerobic lactic
(%WLA ), anaerobic alactic (%WAL ) and aerobic energy (%WO2 ) in
different aerobic interval sets leading to a lactate value of 3 mmol/l for a
well endurance trained (speed at 4 mmol/l over 400 m = V4400 = 1.5 m/s)
and less endurance trained (V4400 = 1.333 m/s) swimmer.
During the aerobic interval sets the blood lactate concentration measured
after each repetition increases within the first 5 min. During the next repeats

lactate will decrease until a lactate steady state is reached (fig. 28; 6 x 200
m R 30” and fig. 44; 6 x 400 m R 30”).
It is thus not unusual to measure, for a constant swimming speed, higher
lactate values after the first repetition of a set than at the end of the
workout. This can be attributed to the increasing contribution of the aerobic
metabolism as the exercise progresses.

Fig. 28 Evolution of the blood lactate concentration during an aerobic
interval training session (6 x 200 m with 30 sec rest).
Aerobic power workouts require a high total volume, short rest and a higher
swimming speed resulting in a progressive increase of the lactate
concentration over the repetitions. The exercises will be swum faster than at
the maximal lactate steady state speed, which is also the case in long
distance races. It is, therefore, important to plan aerobic power sets during
the pre-competition training period to enable the swimmer to mobilize the
maximum amount of aerobic and anaerobic energy during the race.
We have been able to determine experimentally the influence of rest and
repeat length on the relation between lactate and swimming speed (fig. 29).
This allows us to estimate from the lactate-speed relationship of a 400 m

swim, the swimming times to be swum in training sets according to desired
lactate ranges (see fig. 54).

Fig. 29 Influence of rest and interval length on the relationship between
lactate and swimming speed.

Anaerobic Intervals As the swimming speed increases, the anaerobic
lactic metabolism will get progressively more involved, reducing the
possibility of the athlete’s attaining a lactate steady state. The sets will be
shorter than the aerobic intervals and be swum either progressively faster or
at a constantly high speed.
Another way to stress the anaerobic metabolism is to lengthen the rest
periods (the rest must be passive) and to shorten the intervals (25 to 75 m
maximum). This strongly involves the anaerobic metabolism at the
beginning of the exercise and is the gentlest way to increase the proportion
of anaerobic work in training. It is therefore very suitable for swimmers
with a low anaerobic capacity, such as the majority of the long distance
swimmers.
Whether the training objective is to improve the anaerobic capacity or the
anaerobic power, the coach will choose one or even a combination of the

above mentioned procedures.
If it is the aim of the training to raise the anaerobic capacity, the repeats
will, of course, be swum fairly fast and alternated with long passive rest
periods. It is, however, important to limit the acidosis, which acts as a brake
on the glycolysis. The blood lactate concentrations that can be expected
after the anaerobic capacity training sets can range from 5 (for long distance
swimmers) to 10 mmol/l (for sprinters).
For the anaerobic power training, the rest periods should be very short and
each repeat should be swum at maximal speed (all-out) right from the start
even if the swimmer is afraid of “dying” (he feels incapable of maintaining
the pace to the wall). The total distance of the exercise will consequently be
limited (175 to 250 m). The set may be repeated during the same training
unit but only after a regenerative swim. However, sets of 500 m or more at
maximal speed during 1 training session are risky for overtraining and
should only be attempted by top level swimmers.
In anaerobic power sets the 3 metabolic processes are driven to their limits,
inducing a high level of acidosis. As a result, lactate values, from 9 to far
above 15 mmol/l can be expected. For a good execution and efficiency of
the exercise the swimmer needs to be mentally prepared and fully
motivated. It is therefore obvious that it is best to restrict anaerobic power
workouts in training to broken sets (3 to 5 intervals of 25 to 75 m swum allout with only 5 to 10 sec rest). For longer repeat distances it is more
appropriate to plan 3 or 4 short races in a test competition. The swimmer is
not expected to swim best times in these competition events, but rather to
consider the races as anaerobic power training and as an opportunity to try
out strategies such as going out fast, etc.

Sprint Intervals The repeat distances of the sprint exercises are short
(max. 15 sec) and are swum at maximal speed with enough rest to allow full
recovery. The aim of this exercise is to raise the swimmer’s basic speed
(different than swimming fast in a tired state).
During these exercises the majority of the energy will be supplied by the
anaerobic alactic metabolism. In contrast to what is reported in the specific
literature, we observed an increase of the blood lactate concentration after
several sprints with long rest breaks. This indicates that beside the
anaerobic alactic system, the other energy supply systems are also activated.

But the lactate values registered after these exercises are not so high that
they impede adaptations necessary for the improvement of speed.

Chapter 4
DETERMINING TRAINING
INTENSITY AND CONTENT
The effectiveness of a training session depends on:
1. the correct choice and sequence of the various types of exercises
within a training period (see part II, Planning and Periodization of
Training)
2. the correct execution of the exercises to induce the desired
adaptations. For the coach this comes down to carefully choosing
and respecting the appropriate:
intensity (swimming speed)
volume
rest
repeat distance (interval length)
Why is the correct execution of the exercises so important?
The combination of intensity (swimming speed), volume, interval length
and rest between the intervals (repeats) determines when and how the
various metabolic processes are activated. The way these processes
contribute to the energy supply will induce specific biological adaptations.
Therefore, to bring about certain improvement in conditioning, the
intensity, volume, rest and interval length of the workout have to be wellbalanced to meet the objectives of the exercise.
Many years of observation, testing and evaluation have revealed that the
most frequent error in training is that the intensity of the exercise is not
matched with its objective. As a result of this:
1. the biological adaptations actually induced in the body differ from
those desired
2. the effectiveness of the subsequent exercises is affected
For example, aerobic exercises swum too fast will not only impede the
desired improvement in aerobic endurance, but will also fatigue the

swimmer unnecessarily preventing her/him from executing subsequent
training exercises correctly, i.e. swimming fast when required.
Apart from training with the wrong intensity (swimming speed) swimmers
often swim too much (too high volume) according to their capabilities.
Rest breaks and repeat distances (interval lengths) are quite closely related
to the training objective and are practically the same whatever the level of
the swimmer may be (World class or regional level; see tab. 2). Intensity
and volume, on the other hand, depend very much on the swimmers’
conditioning and need thus to be carefully and individually chosen.
In the following section we will consider some techniques to ensure the
appropriate training intensity and volume:
1.
the swimmer’s subjective perception of intensity
2.
blood lactate
3.
heart rate
4.
percentage of best times
5.
30-minute test or T30

THE SWIMMER’S SUBJECTIVE PERCEPTION OF
INTENSITY
The easiest way to assess the training intensity is to ask the swimmer about
his perception of the difficulty of the exercise (was the set easygoing? Was
it hard? etc.). In general we can state that:
aerobic and anaerobic capacity training
are subjectively perceived as easy to moderate intensive
aerobic and anaerobic power training,
both metabolically very exhaustive, are respectively perceived as
highly intensive and exhaustive

Experience, however, taught us that the swimmer’s subjective perception of
training intensity very much depends on the speed and volume he is
accustomed to in training. Indeed, the same subjective sensation may, for
example, correspond to different intensities with different swimmers or the
same intensity may arouse different subjective sensations. A swimmer who
often swims too fast in training will therefore, subjectively feel good during
intensive training sessions, while a swimmer who rarely swims intensively
will, with the same intensity, feel totally exhausted.
During a training session we measured lactate after an aerobic interval set
and asked the swimmers to estimate subjectively the intensity on a scale
coded from 1 to 20. This scale, also called the Borg scale, expresses the
feeling of intensity in numbers from 1, which is very easy, to 20 which is
extremely difficult (Borg 1982; the new version is coded from 1 to 10, also
see Maglischo, Swimming Even Faster, 1993). In doing so it allows
swimmers to quantify their subjective feeling of intensity.
There was only a very slight correlation between the subjective feeling of
the training intensity and the actual (objective) metabolic workload
measured by means of lactate (fig. 30). Indeed, we found, for example, for
the level 12 on the Borg scale (more intensive) variations in measured blood
lactate concentrations from 2.9 to 7.8 mmol/l. For the same concentration of
lactate at, for example, 4 mmol/l the feeling of intensity varied from intense
(10 on the Borg scale) to very highly intense (16 on the Borg scale).

Fig. 30 Relation between the subjective feeling of intensity during
a training set (using the Borg scale) and the objective metabolic
workload (blood lactate concentrations).
This means, in training terms, that one and the same subjective impression
of intensity easily can represent a totally different activity of the 3
metabolic processes and therefore induce different training effects. A coach
who relies exclusively on the subjective impression of his swimmers to
determine the intensity of the different types of training exercises could,
thus, have some nasty surprises. Indeed, the planning and periodization may
be correct and the swimmers’ subjective experience of intensity may also
match totally what the coach expects. However, if the feelings of the
swimmers misrepresent the actual metabolic intensity, the training
adaptations that occur may be undesirable.
Determining the real training intensity, i.e. the workload on the swimmer’s
organism, is thus a conditio sine qua non for reaching the desired training
effect. The coach must therefore have at his disposal an objective measure
to precisely determine the training intensity.

This does not mean that the swimmer’s “subjective feeling of intensity” is
unimportant. Of course not, but it needs to be “calibrated” with objective
measurements such as lactate. If swimmers are regularly tested they will
progressively be able to match their subjective feeling of intensity with the
lactate readings. They will learn to estimate quite exactly the intensity of
the training exercises, and, therefore, provide the coach with much more
reliable and meaningful feedback.

BLOOD LACTATE
In contrast to the subjective perception of intensity, blood lactate
concentrations allow to assess the real workload of an exercise on the
muscles. Lactate is therefore the best reflection of the real training intensity.
Although lactate has already been used to optimize training since the
1970’s, there was little scientific evidence on the optimal test protocol or on
the interpretation and implementation of the test results. Very often test
results were conflicting with observations in training and/or competition or
with the coach’s experience. As a result, lactate tests gradually fell into
discredit. However, a lot of top coaches, who learned to understand the real
meaning of lactate, consider now lactate tests as an indispensable even
essential tool for maximizing the effectiveness of their training.
It is thus very important for the coach to acquire a good knowledge on the
basic principles of lactate production, distribution and elimination in order
to properly use lactate in training. So, before getting on with the description
of the test protocols and the use of lactate in training, let’s first briefly focus
on the basics of lactate.
Why using lactate?

Lactate is an intermediary product in the process of delivering energy (fig.
13) and is released through the anaerobic lactic metabolism when the
energy delivered by the anaerobic alactic and aerobic system becomes
insufficient. This may happen:
in the beginning of an effort when
creatine phosphate (CP) is exhausted and the aerobic system does
not yet deliver enough energy due to its slow start or
during an effort when the workload
(swimming speed) is so high that the aerobic energy supply
approaches its maximal capacity. In this case it is clear that lactate
tests reflect the performance of both, the anaerobic lactic and
aerobic energy supply systems.
The blood lactate readings, therefore, provide us with information on:
1.
the activation and contribution of the aerobic and anaerobic
systems
2. the performance of both systems, when combined with the
swimming speed

Lactate as a Measure for Training Intensity
The use of lactate to determine the intensity of the training exercises
enables us to link these intensities to the activity of the 3 different energy
delivering systems in the muscle. Because these lactate based training
intensities provide information on how the exercises trigger the metabolic
system, it is possible to relate the induced training adaptations to the
metabolic characteristics of the muscular activity during a certain training
period. In time, lactate tests will provide for each individual swimmer, an
insight into the biological adaptations that can be expected from the training
exercises.

Relevance and Reliability of the Lactate Readings
If you want the lactate tests to provide relevant and reliable information,
make sure:

the tests are performed in the specific
sport , even in the specific stroke you wish the information to be
used for
the highest post-exercise lactate concentration is
used for the evaluation

Fig. 31 Maximal oxygen uptake and blood lactate in running and cycling as
compared to swimming. Plots represent mean values from different studies.

Sport Specific Testing a swimmer, for example, on a bicycle ergometer
or treadmill will virtually produce no reliable information on the swim
specific conditioning of that swimmer (fig. 31, 32 and 77) and will
therefore provide no useful advice for swim training. Indeed, figure 32
clearly shows that there is no scientific evidence that the swimmer who has
a higher 4 mmol/l workload (watt/kg) on the bicycle ergometer also swims
faster at 4 mmol/l. The 4 mmol/l swim speed is an important parameter for
estimating the training intensity as well as the swim performance in
competition. It is quite obvious, however, that the 4 mmol/l workload on the
bicycle will not provide any valid indication for competition performance
or training intensity in swimming.

Fig. 32 Oxygen uptake and performance at 4 mmol/l lactate in cycling as
compared to swimming. Plots represent individual values.

Stroke Specific

Likewise back-, breaststroke and good fly swimmers
will have to be tested in their personal best stroke if the coach wants to use
the lactate test readings for optimizing respectively back- breaststroke or fly
training. Indeed, although changes in 4 mmol/l speed (V4) in freestyle are
roughly correlated with the changes in V4 in back-, breaststroke and fly,
they cannot always be transferred to nor observed in the other strokes (fig.
33). The correlation is too weak to reliably assess the aerobic endurance
(V4) in back-, breaststroke or fly based on the measured V4 in freestyle.

Fig. 33 Changes in 4 mmol/l speed (V4) in freestyle are only roughly
correlated with the changes in V4 in back-, breaststroke and fly. Indeed,
changes in V4 in freestyle cannot always be transferred to nor observed in
the other strokes. The correlation is too weak to reliably assess the aerobic
endurance (V4) in breast-, backstroke or fly based on the measured V4 in
freestyle.

Blood Sampling For a reliable lactate test it is also important to take
arterial blood (from the ear lobe, preferably, or from the finger tip) and to
catch the highest blood lactate concentration (= the highest post-exercise
lactate reading) as only this value tells something about the lactate
production in the muscle. As lactate moves from the muscle into the
bloodstream, where it is finally measured, there will always be a delay
between the time the peak muscle lactate concentration is reached and the
time the highest blood lactate value occurs (fig. 34). To be sure to catch the
highest blood lactate concentration after an exercise, at least 2 blood
samples should be taken.

Fig. 34 Evolution of the lactate concentration in the muscle and in blood
during and after an exercise (Mader et al. 1981).
After a submaximal swim of more than 100 m, 2 blood samples will usually
do; the first sample in the 1st minute after the effort, and the second sample
in the 3rd minute. If the second reading is higher than the first one, it will
be necessary to take a third blood sample in the 5th minute, and, perhaps
even several additional samples until the blood lactate concentration
declines.
The more intensive and/or the shorter the effort (100 m and less), the later
the peak blood lactate concentration appears and the more blood samples
will have to be taken. Therefore, after a maximal effort we start taking
blood samples in the 3rd minute, and then every 2 minutes until blood
lactate declines. With an instant analyzer it is easy to observe whether
lactate is decreasing or not. But, if no direct lactate measurement is
available, you will have to take blood samples in the 3rd, 5th, 7th, 10th and
even 12th min after the short all-out effort to make sure you do not miss the
highest blood lactate concentration.

Basics for a Reliable Interpretation of Lactate Readings

The interpretation of the lactate tests is not as simple as it seems. Indeed,
different training exercises may, for the same swimmer, produce the same
blood lactate concentration. Nevertheless it may correspond to different
training efforts/loads/intensities and thus induce different biological
adaptations (training effects). Moreover the same lactate concentration
measured after a certain training set may, for different swimmers, represent
a different metabolic activity of the working muscle and therefore have a
different meaning for each of them.
The new findings in lactate research provide an answer to the numerous
paradoxes of the classic interpretation of the lactate readings. In the
following section we will deal with a new scientific theory which enables
the coach to have a better understanding of lactate and to interpret the
lactate values in a reliable way.
It is only possible to get at the real meaning of a lactate reading if the
following 3 aspects are taken into account:

*

* the absolute value of the reading
* the proportion of the swimmer’s aerobic and anaerobic capacity that
is involved in the effort
the characteristics of the exercise (volume, intensity, rest and interval)

The Lactate Curve

For as long as lactate has been used in sports to
optimize training efficiency, the lactate curve has been considered as the
starting point for describing and defining the athlete’s conditioning profile.
We will, therefore, first discuss the origin and meaning of the lactate curve.
When, for example, a swimmer is asked to perform a set of progressively
faster swims, lactate will be low after the first and very extensive repeat, but
will rise clearly from a certain speed on (= lactate onset). The faster the
subsequent swims, the higher the lactate reading will be. Plotting the
swimming speed against the respective lactate values in a lactate-speed
diagram and connecting all these points with a line (curve) shows the
lactate curve (fig. 35).

Fig. 35 The lactate curve shows the relation between lactate and speed for a
specific exercise (adapted from Kelly et al. 1992).
This curve can now be used to estimate the speed for a given lactate value
or vice versa, to estimate the blood lactate concentration for a given speed.
Figure 36 shows the estimation of the swimming speed generating 4 mmol/l
blood lactate as well as the expected blood lactate concentration
corresponding to the swimming speed of 1.6 m/s (4:10 min) for a 400 m
swim.

Fig. 36 The lactate curve shows the blood lactate concentration that can be
expected at different swimming speeds, or vice versa, the swimming speed
that can be expected at different blood lactate concentrations. In this
example 4 mmol/l lactate corresponds to 1.392 m/s (4:47.4) and 1.6 m/s
(4:10) corresponds to 12.1 mmol/l lactate.
The lactate curve reflects thus the relation between speed and lactate for the
specific exercise the swimmer performed. Indeed, depending on both the
distance of each swim and the rest between each repetition, the shape and/or
position of the lactate curve will change:
* the longer the distance of the interval, the earlier (at lower swimming
speed) the lactate onset (fig. 37)
* the longer the interval test distance, the higher the lactate
concentration for any swimming speed faster than the velocity at the
lactate onset (fig. 37)
* a short rest between the swims will produce an exponential curve
while a complete rest will lead to a nearly linear curve (fig. 38)
* in comparison with a complete rest between the swim intervals, a
short rest will lead to a later lactate onset (at a higher speed) but to

higher lactate concentrations at moderate to intensive swimming
speeds (fig.38)

Fig. 37 The longer the test distance, the earlier (at lower swimming speed)
the onset of blood lactate.

Fig. 38 Influence of test protocol on the lactate curve. All swimmers
performed both types of test protocols.

Shift of the Lactate Curve: Interaction of the Aerobic and
Anaerobic System on the Lactate Curve For exercises longer than
2 minutes, lactate in the bloodstream increases sharply (= lactate onset)
when the swimmer approaches the limit of his aerobic capacity (=
maximum oxygen uptake or VO2 max). The higher the swimmer’s VO2 max
(aerobic capacity), the faster he will be able to swim before the onset of the
blood lactate occurs. In the lactate-speed diagram the increase of the
aerobic capacity will, thus, pull the lactate curve to the right. As a result, the
swimming speed corresponding to 4 mmol/l lactate (V4) will increase. This
reasoning has contributed to the belief of many years that a faster V4 is
unconditionally linked with an improved VO2 max.
This approach was simple and became widely used but there quickly
appeared some unexplainable problems with lactate testing. Many coaches
and sports scientists noticed that, as the season progressed, the V4 or other
measure of endurance often did not change or even got worse as the
swimmers were getting faster in competition. Some questioned whether
there was any further improvement in aerobic endurance or that the lactate
tests were not a good measure of aerobic endurance. Since we believed that
the theory was good and the aerobic capacity was increasing there must be
something missing from the interpretation of the lactate tests.
Indeed, we observed that the onset of lactate as well as V4 did not occur at
the same percentage of VO2 max for every swimmer (fig. 39). For example,
swimmer A has a sharp increase of lactate in the blood at about 60% of his
VO2 max, while this occurs at about 70% of swimmer B’s aerobic capacity.
This difference in aerobic contribution can be explained by the swimmers’
level of anaerobic capacity (the maximal capacity to produce
lactate/pyruvate per second = glycolysis). The higher the anaerobic capacity
(VLamax), the sooner the anaerobic system will be involved in the energy
supply and the sooner the lactate onset may occur. As opposed to an
increase of the aerobic capacity, which will pull the lactate curve to the
right, the increase of the anaerobic capacity will pull the lactate curve to the
left and consequently slow down V4. Meanwhile an increase of the
anaerobic capacity will also lower the percentage of VO2 max at the lactate
onset and at V4. As a result: if V4 (= the 4 mmol/l lactate speed) remains

the same but the anaerobic capacity increases, V4 will occur at a lower
percentage of VO2 max and thus be related to a higher VO2 max.
As an improvement of the anaerobic capacity generally occurs as the season
progresses and the anaerobic training is increasingly emphasized, V4 may
remain the same or even get worse despite an unchanged or even improved
VO2 max.

Fig. 39 Oxygen uptake (- - -) and lactate concentration (---- ) during a set of
progressively faster swims. The %VO2 max reached at the lactate onset and
at the 4 mmol/l blood lactate is indicated for a student (o) and an elite
swimmer (■).

This can graphically be illustrated by a pulley system on each side of the
lactate curve (fig. 40). On the right side you have the aerobic capacity (VO2
max) pulley. The higher VO2 max, the higher the force that pulls the lactate
curve to the right. On the left side you have the anaerobic capacity
(VLamax) pulley. The higher VLamax, the higher the force to pull the curve
to the left. The final position of the lactate curve will be where both forces
are balanced.

Fig. 40 The final position of the lactate curve depends on the balance
between the aerobic and anaerobic capacities.
With this in mind, it is obvious that a sprinter with a high VLamax and also
a “World class” aerobic capacity will never have a lactate curve positioned
as far to the right as a top level long distance swimmer’s who has the same
aerobic capacity but a lower VLamax. The example given in figure 41
clearly shows that the lactate curve of the World class sprinter is located to
the left of the World class long distance swimmer’s curve. This is not the
result of a difference in aerobic capacity between the World class sprinter
and long distance swimmer, but of a different balance between their
respective aerobic and anaerobic capacities. Indeed, as their aerobic
capacities are nearly identical, it is the sprinter’s higher anaerobic capacity
that will hold the curve on the left.

Fig. 41 The position of the distance swimmer’s lactate curve to the right of
the sprinter’s curve does not always reflect a better aerobic capacity, but can
just as easily come about through a weaker anaerobic capacity (see text).
Experimental research, where maximal oxygen uptake was measured during
swimming, confirms this finding and shows a nearly identical aerobic
capacity (VO2 max) in World class sprinters and distance swimmers. The
difference between their lactate curves is therefore not produced by a
different aerobic capacity but is due to a different level of anaerobic
capacity (the sprinter’s much higher anaerobic capacity).

Interpretation of the Lactate Curve

For years the interpretation of
the lactate curve and readings was thought to be quite simple:

This classic interpretation, however, resulted in a lot of misleading
evaluations of the conditioning and incorrect advice on training. Research

has now shown that, as both the aerobic and anaerobic capacities define the
position of the lactate curve:
* it is essential to consider both capacities together before evaluating
and interpreting the shifts of the lactate curve
* there are not 3 but 13 ways to explain the shifts of the lactate curve,
making the interpretation much more intricate, complex, and delicate
but actually more accurate and reliable (fig. 42)

Fig. 42 Not 3 (classical interpretations) but actually 13 different reasons for
changes in the position of the lactate curve.
For example, the movement of the lactate curve to the right does not
automatically reflect an improvement of the aerobic capacity. Indeed, as the
anaerobic capacity decreases, the force to pull the curve to the left weakens
causing a shift to the right without any change in aerobic capacity. The
lactate curve moves thus to the right not because of an improvement in
aerobic capacity but of a decrease in anaerobic capacity. The opposite is
also possible. A shift of the lactate curve to the left is not unconditionally a
reflection of a lower aerobic capacity, but can also come about through an
improvement in anaerobic capacity; the pulling force towards the left
increases while the pulling force to the right remains the same, causing the
lactate curve to move to the left (fig. 43). The classical interpretation of the

lactate curves in figure 43 points to a deterioration in aerobic capacity,
however, the simulation model explains that the shift to the left is the result
of an improved anaerobic capacity and an unchanged aerobic capacity. This
explanation proved to be much more in line with the swimmer’s progress
and achievements in training and in competition.

Fig. 43 Shift of the lactate-speed curve to the left despite an unchanged
aerobic capacity.
And the whole process behind the move of the lactate curve can become
even more complex. For example, a deterioration of the aerobic capacity
can also cause the lactate curve to shift to the right if the anaerobic capacity
decreases even more. Thus, the pulling force to the left drops off more than
the pulling force to the right, resulting in a move of the lactate curve to the
right.

Lactate Readings in Training

The characteristics of the exercises
also strongly influence the meaning of the lactate reading. Indeed, a 3
mmol/l lactate reached for example after a single 400 m or after a set of 6 x
400 m with 30 seconds rest needs to be interpreted differently as it has to be
ascribed to:
* a different use of the metabolic processes

* different swimming speeds
To prove this we asked a group of swimmers to swim a series of 6 x 400 m
with 30 seconds rest at a constant speed corresponding to 3.5 mmol/l blood
lactate in a single 400 m free swim (fig. 44). After the first repetition a
mean blood lactate of 3.5 mmol/l was actually reached. After the 2nd and
3rd repetition likewise swum at the same constant speed, we detected a
decrease in the concentration of lactate to 2.7 mmol/l on average, which
then hardly changed during the remainder of the exercise.

Fig. 44 Evolution of the blood lactate concentrations during a series of 6 x
400 m with 30 seconds rest, swum at a constant speed corresponding to 3.5
mmol/l in a single 400 m free swim.
What has actually happened?
Over the first 3 repetitions the contribution of the aerobic metabolism,
which requires a certain lead time before being able to deliver the desired
amount of energy, progressively increases, gradually taking over the work
of the anaerobic lactic system. This results not only in a reduction of the
lactate/pyruvate production but also in an increase of the lactate/pyruvate
elimination, as lactate/pyruvate is used as fuel. Consequently at the end of

the workout less lactate reaches the bloodstream. The concentration of
lactate measured in the blood will thus decline.
If, nevertheless, the coach wants to have this exercise ended at 3.5 mmol/l
he will have to ask his swimmer to swim progressively faster during the
course of the series. The swimming speed that in the series of 6 x 400 m
corresponds to 3.5 mmol/l is thus clearly higher than the speed that leads to
3.5 mmol/l after a single 400 m swim.

Interpretation of Lactate Readings in Training

In training as
well as during a test, the balance between the aerobic and anaerobic
capacities influences the meaning of the lactate value. If a coach asks 2
swimmers to complete the same set at the same lactate concentration, he
often assumes that both swimmers train at the same intensity. This however
is hardly ever the case.
For example, 2 swimmers, whether or not with the same V4, complete the
same training set at 3 mmol/l. The one with the higher aerobic capacity will
use more lactate/pyruvate and therefore be forced to produce more of it than
his training mate with the lower aerobic capacity (fig. 27). As a result, the
anaerobic contribution will be higher for the well endurance trained athlete
despite the same 3 mmol/l lactate value after the same workout.
This can be demonstrated by the simulation of a 6 x 400 m set with 30 sec
rest, for 3 swimmers with different aerobic and anaerobic capacities, at 4
different paces. The paces were chosen so that each swimmer would reach
blood lactate concentrations of 1, 2, 3 and 4 mmol/l at the end of the
workout (fig. 45). Swimmer A has both a higher aerobic and anaerobic
capacity than swimmer B (see right upper part of the graph). Nevertheless,
the capacities of both swimmers result in the same lactate curve (see lower
right) and in the same swimming speeds that produce 1, 2, 3 and 4 mmol/l
lactate after the simulated workout (see lower left). Despite the same lactate
curve, the same swimming speed and the same lactate concentration during
the 6 x 400 m interval set, the aerobic and anaerobic capacities of swimmer
A are definitely less charged than those of swimmer B; indeed from 1 till 4
mmol/l swimmer A uses his aerobic and anaerobic capacities respectively
for 74 till 78% of VO2 max (aerobic capacity) and for 6 to 10% of VLamax
(anaerobic capacity) while swimmer B, for the same range of lactate values,
uses his aerobic capacity for 83 to 86% and his anaerobic capacity for 15 to

22% (see upper left). This training set will, thus, affect both swimmers
differently and induce different training adaptations, i.e. an improvement of
aerobic capacity in swimmer A and an improvement of aerobic power in
swimmer B. If swimmers A and B perform the same training program in the
same way for several weeks, swimmer B will run a higher risk for
overtraining because he will be stressing both his aerobic and anaerobic
metabolism more intensely.
Swimmer C is a classic example of a good long distance swimmer with a
good aerobic and a weak anaerobic capacity. For this swimmer, the 6 x 400
m at 1, 2, 3 and 4 mmol/l lactate will lead to a much higher training load on
his metabolic system than for swimmers A and B. In order to decrease the
training load to a normal level both swimmers C and B will have to slow
down on the 6 x 400 m and train at lower lactate levels than swimmer A.

Fig. 45 Different metabolic impact of a 6 x 400 m with 30 sec rest leading
to 1, 2, 3 and 4 mmol/l at the end of the set for 3 swimmers (A, B and C)
with different aerobic and anaerobic capacities. These results were obtained
by simulation (see text).
Thus, if a swimmer combines a well developed aerobic capacity with a low
anaerobic capacity - which is usually the case with long distance swimmers

- it is obvious that:
* a higher contribution of aerobic and anaerobic work will be
necessary for him to reach, for example, 3 mmol/l lactate. He will be
forced to use more of his aerobic and anaerobic reserves than his
training mates with a higher anaerobic capacity
* he will also have difficulty accumulating lactate during long
continuous swims or long interval sets. It is, indeed, not so unusual for
him to swim flat out in a long training set and “founder” exhausted on
2 or 3 mmol/l lactate
On the other hand, swimmers with a modest anaerobic and a good aerobic
capacity will easily achieve high but accumulated lactate values in long
(distance) exercises or sets. In fact, it often happens (see fig. 21) that good
long distance swimmers reach higher levels of lactate than sprinters after a
long distance event even though their anaerobic capacity is lower. Indeed,
the high anaerobic capacity of the sprinters will quickly lead to the
acidification of the muscle cells protecting them by inhibiting the energy
processes and, resulting in a slow down of the effort and virtually no further
accumulation of lactate since its production has been dimmed. Moreover,
this quick and substantial activation of the anaerobic system will impede a
high contribution of the aerobic system during efforts lasting more than 2
minutes.

What about Lactate Elimination?

The lactate elimination process
occurs during as well as after the effort and affects the position of the
lactate curve. Basic research has shown that the lactate elimination rate
mainly depends on the oxygen uptake during the exercise and on the lactate
concentration available in the muscle. Based on these findings the
simulation program (see Advanced Lactate Test) calculates the maximal

elimination rate as well as the elimination of lactate during the effort to
assess its contribution to the position of the lactate curve.

What about the Lactate Thresholds?

Lactate tests and the aerobic
and anaerobic threshold, whether or not the individual anaerobic threshold
or the lactate steady state, are often mentioned in the same breath. Until
now, we have spent very little time discussing the lactate thresholds in
swimming for several reasons:
There are a lot of different definitions of
thresholds, with respect to the aerobic and anaerobic energy
supply, each with a different physiological meaning. The only
metabolic threshold that can be considered as a reliable reference
for the endurance performance of an athlete is the maximal lactate
steady state (MaxLa ss in Europe and lactate threshold in the US)
which is defined as the highest swimming speed that can be
maintained for more than 20 min at a constant lactate
concentration. At this point (MaxLa ss ) lactate elimination equals
lactate production. The speed that can be reached at MaxLa ss
determines the aerobic power of the athlete. A high lactate
elimination capacity will allow the anaerobic energy supply to
contribute to a greater extent during a long effort without an
increase of the lactate concentration
The experimental determination of
MaxLa ss is very work and time intensive; time and efforts that are
lost for training. For elite swimmers, however, we avoid losing
time for training by calculating the MaxLa ss with a simulation
program that uses lactate readings from different tests
The different methodologies to determine
the metabolic thresholds based on multiple step tests are not only
very time consuming but are also subject to intensive discussions
on their validity and reproducibility. It is very easy to determine a
fixed aerobic (at 2 mmol/l lactate) and a fixed anaerobic threshold

(at 4 mmol/l lactate); the methodology to determine an individual
anaerobic threshold (varying from 1 to 6 mmol/l), on the other
hand, is much more complex and all the more controversial as far
as the reliability and validity of the method are concerned
In the early period of the history of lactate testing it was often suggested
that the anaerobic threshold was the optimum training intensity for
improving aerobic endurance. Later studies as well as practical experience
have shown that this is not the case. Indeed, from the perspective of the
physiology and the training science there is very little scientific evidence
about the anaerobic threshold being the unique and best intensity for
endurance training. The biological adaptations, which are necessary to
achieve an improvement in aerobic endurance, are very complex and cannot
be generated through one single training intensity. Only a combination of
different types of exercises, each of them inducing specific training effects,
will improve the swimmer’s aerobic conditioning and in the end ensure
success in competition.
So, as there is neither scientific nor anecdotal evidence that a training
workout at the aerobic or anaerobic threshold has any advantage over a
good balanced program of different types of training, the cost in time
needed to determine a reliable anaerobic threshold (= the lactate threshold
or MaxLass ) is not offset. The information gained by the determination of
the lactate threshold will not be of any additional help to improve training
efficiency. Therefore the determination of an aerobic or anaerobic threshold
should be reserved for academic study purposes only.
Moreover, all speculations as well as the lack of a clear statement regarding
thresholds provoke with coaches and athletes more confusion than
advantages. For this reason we will use the terms fixed aerobic or anaerobic
threshold, the individual anaerobic threshold or the lactate steady state as
little as possible to avoid the misleading link to the “ideal training
intensity”.

Lactate Testing - Design and Execution
We can state that lactate measurements reflect the activity of both the
aerobic and anaerobic metabolism. In combination with swimming speed
they allow to:

1. determine the aerobic and anaerobic capacity of the swimmer
2. detect the strong and weak aspects in conditioning with regard
to both capacities
3. determine, for the next training period, the training objectives,
the dosage and configuration of the various types of training
exercises
4. estimate the training intensity and volume appropriate to the
various training assignments
5. evaluate the changes in metabolic performance and so to assess
the effectiveness of training and to eliminate as much useless
training exercises as possible

Age Lactate tests can be carried out regardless of the age of the swimmer.
However, converting the test results into practical training advice will
become easier if the athlete can produce a great deal of lactate. Since young
swimmers are usually not yet capable of producing much of it, using lactate
tests is often more difficult with them.
But, exceptionally, some young swimmers even as young as 8 can produce
more lactate than an adult swimmer. It would therefore be wrong to
determine for whom lactate tests might be meaningful on the basis of age
alone. Knowing whether a young swimmer is capable of producing a lot or
only a little lactate is extremely helpful in putting together a correct and
appropriate age group training program.

Frequency

The usefulness of lactate testing and its frequency per year
can best be determined by the performance level of the swimmer. For a
young swimmer with a rather low performance level, one simple lactate test
per year is sufficient to characterize in broad outline his physiological
profile and to pass on to the coach the most important directives for an
appropriate training framework. The adjustments to the training intensity
during the year can then be made in accordance with a series of alternative
tests, such as, for example, the 30-minute test, the percentage of the
swimmer’s best times, the heart rate, etc. (see later). The swimming
technique of these swimmers is often quite poor so that the training process
should be focused on this aspect of performance (technique) more so than
on the improvement of the conditioning.

Criteria for a Reliable Test Protocol

The better the swimmer’s
performance, the more accurate the training must be, the more useful the
lactate tests become and the more often they should be scheduled (at most
every 6 weeks) regardless the swimmer’s age. The testing procedure will
also become more complex, vary according to the specialty of the swimmer
and be supplemented with lactate measurements during training (spot
lactate tests) and competition.
To provide relevant information about the swimmer’s metabolic
performance level, the lactate test should meet following conditions:
the test has to be a swimming effort (sport
specific) carried out in the stroke (stroke specific) for which the
information on conditioning is wished (see Relevance and
Reliability of the Lactate Readings)
enough blood samples need to be taken to ensure
the assessment of the highest post-exercise blood lactate
concentration (see Relevance and Reliability of the Lactate
Readings)
preference should be given to a single effort or to
several efforts separated by total recovery rather than to a step test
in order to avoid interactions of short rest breaks and the
metabolic response of previous intervals on the lactate readings.
These interactions would only make the interpretation of the
lactate values much more difficult
strength training and very exhaustive workouts
(with high volume and/or at high intensities) should be avoided
within 24 hours before the lactate test, as these efforts strongly
affect the reliability of the test interpretation
Indeed we have learned from practice that the lactate response may be
disturbed for 24 hours after strength training. Lactate accumulation at a
submaximal workload seems to occur at an earlier stage and the lactate
concentration after an all-out effort is less than expected. Taking such a

disturbed lactate response as a reference for determining the actual
physical conditioning profile, for evaluating the training efficiency and
for deducing training guidelines for the coming training period will
certainly be “misleading”
A similar interaction of less magnitude, happens if an intense water
training session precedes a lactate test within 24 hours
the test situation should always be comparable
(pool length, morning or afternoon, comparable timing in
periodization, diet, ...)
We have observed that in the afternoon one could swim about 1 sec/100 m
faster for the same submaximal lactate concentration as compared to the
morning session (fig. 46)

Fig. 46 Influence of test situation on the lactate readings.
This means that a lactate test should be performed at approximately the
same time of the day, particularly when working with top swimmers.
With these swimmers the room of improvement is restricted because
they are already strong performers and it is important to ensure that

small differences are really due to conditioning changes and not the
consequence of a different testing time
Besides the time of the day, the coach has to ensure that “surrounding
workouts” do not influence the lactate readings (fig. 46). Indeed, if for
example, a 45-minute extensive workout (around 1.5 mmol/l) is
inserted between 2 submaximal swims (200 or 400 m), the second
effort will be swum statistically significantly faster but with a
statistically significantly lower post-exercise lactate concentration as
compared to the first effort which was swum immediately after the
warm-up (1100 m). A 50 m sprint between two 400 m submaximal
swims, on the other hand, has the opposite effect on the lactate-speed
relation. In this test design (400 m submax., 15 min regeneration swim,
50 m sprint, 15 min regeneration swim and then the second 400 m
submax. swim) swimmers will show no significant different lactate
concentrations after the first and second 400 m swim, but they will
therefore swim significantly slower during the second 400 m
Moreover, it is also essential to carry out the lactate tests at comparable
points of time in the training periodization. Indeed, if a swimmer has
just finished a long period (more than 7 days) of high volume or
intensive training, the glycogen load of his muscles may be decreased
and therefore attenuate the glycolytic activity which is responsible for
producing lactate. In such a situation, the lactate production will be
decreased and will result in a later onset of blood lactate accumulation
(fig. 47) and a lower lactate concentration at exhaustion
This may give the impression that the swimmer improved in
endurance, but in fact it is not a higher oxygen uptake (= real
endurance improvement) but a lower lactate production capacity that
causes the shift of the lactate curve to the right. It is therefore advisable
to avoid lactate tests immediately after an extended high volume or
intensive training period such as a swim camp, and to allow at least 3
days of regeneration training before testing

Fig. 47 Influence of the muscle glycogen content on the lactate curve.
Similarly, lactate tests after an altitude training camp should, from a
scientific point of view, not be carried out within 14 days after return to
sea level. This, however, makes little sense in practice. Indeed, the
purpose of altitude training camps is usually to prepare athletes for
major competitions that take place between 20 and 28 days after
returning to sea level. Therefore, it is not appropriate for the coach to
wait 14 days before getting any training information for the precompetition fine-tuning. We therefore often advise to check for
changes in the conditioning profile within 3 to 5 days after return to
sea level, knowing however, that these results do not include nor
represent all the effects of the altitude training
Not only the training (volume and/or intensity) completed but also the
diet may affect the muscle glycogen load and consequently the
glycolysis and the lactate results. We recommend, therefore, in order to
avoid any interaction of the diet on the lactate test, to keep it as similar
as possible during the days preceding the lactate test

To summarize we can state that, to avoid as much as
possible all these interaction factors, lactate tests have to be planned
well in advance (while periodizing the macrocycle) and preferably at
the end of a recovery week or possibly in the first week of a
mesocycle. If any of the interactions mentioned above cannot be
avoided - training always has the highest priority and should never
yield to a test -, they should at least be taken into account when
interpreting the test results
the test should always allow the
evaluation of both the aerobic and anaerobic metabolism . This
can be done by:
✽ combining both a submaximal aerobic and an all-out anaerobic
effort (see Standard Lactate Test). To assess the aerobic endurance
, the swimming speed at 4 mmol/l lactate (V4) during a
submaximal effort lasting at least 2 minutes (optimal is more than 5
minutes so the oxygen uptake and the blood lactate can approach a
steady state) can be used. The faster the V4 in such a submaximal
effort, the better the aerobic endurance. For an estimation of the
anaerobic capacity the exercise has to be all-out and should not last
longer than 2 minutes (preferably 45 seconds to 1:30 min); a 50 or
100 m competition would also do, especially to avoid as much as
possible a lack of motivation. We can assume that the higher the
lactate value after the short all-out effort, the better the anaerobic
capacity. However, this is only a rough approach. It does not enable
the coach to quantify the anaerobic capacity but certainly gives an
idea on how to interpret the obtained relation between lactate and
speed. The use of table 10 will confirm the impact of the anaerobic
capacity on the lactate values after the submaximal effort and so
help to interpret the observed lactate-speed results
✽
using the simulation program (see Advanced Lactate Test)
which quantifies both the aerobic and anaerobic capacities and
reveals their respective contribution to the measured lactate and
speed (Olbrecht 1989)

Standard Lactate Test: the 2- and 1-Speed Test One of the first
lactate test protocols which met the criteria mentioned above and allowed
the evaluation of both the aerobic and anaerobic metabolism was Mader’s
2-Speed test (Mader 1980).
Test Protocol
It consists in swimming twice the same distance, in the same stroke but at
different speeds. The first repetition is swum at submaximal speed while the
second is all-out. Before each repetition, 5 minutes of complete rest is given
to the swimmer and between both repetitions there must be at least 15
minutes rest, preferably active. Blood samples, to determine the highest
post-exercise lactate concentrations, are taken in the 1st, 3rd and possibly in
the 5th minute after the submaximal effort and in the 3rd, 5th, 7th, 10th and,
if necessary, also in the 12th minute after the maximal effort (fig. 48).

Fig. 48 A swimmer swims twice the same distance; the first repetition at
submaximal speed, the second all-out. After the submaximal swim, lactate
is measured in the 1st and 3rd minute while after the maximal effort blood
samples are taken in the 3rd, 5th, 7th and 10th minute till a decrease of
lactate sets in (2-Speed test protocol, Mader 1980).

It could be shown for each test distance and for each stroke that, once above
2.5 mmol/l, the increase in lactate for a given increase in speed (= the slope
of the curve) was nearly the same for all male or female swimmers (Mader
1980, Olbrecht 1989). This allows us to plot both swimming speeds against
their corresponding highest post-exercise lactate concentration into a
lactate-speed diagram, and to connect both points by a straight line in order
to obtain the relation between speed and lactate, i.e. the lactate curve (fig.
49). This curve reflects the actual aerobic and anaerobic performance of the
tested swimmer, and is only valid for the tested exercise (interval distance
and rest). Other test distances or another test protocol will of course
generate other lactate curves (see Lactate Curve).

Fig. 49 The lactate curve, i.e. the relation between speed and lactate, can be
designed by plotting the swimming speeds of a 2-Speed test against the
corresponding highest post-exercise lactate concentrations in a lactate-speed
diagram and by connecting both points by a straight line.
Based on the nearly constant slope per stroke, distance and gender, we
simplified the 2-Speed test and developed the 1-Speed test (Olbrecht 1989).
The test distance is swum only once and 1 plotted point in the lactate-speed
diagram defines where to draw the lactate curve (fig. 50 (a)).

There are however some limitations to the 1-Speed test. Indeed, since small
variations in the nearly constant slope are possible, the 1-Speed test can
only be used to draw/estimate the lactate curve for a limited range around
the measured lactate values, i.e. the lactate reading + 4 mmol/l and not
lower than 2.5 mmol/l. A submaximal 1-Speed test will therefore provide
reliable information on the lactate-speed relation only for a range of
submaximal intensities (fig. 50 (b)) while an all-out 1-Speed test will
guarantee the same reliability for near maximal to maximal efforts (fig. 50
(c)). A submaximal 1-Speed test is thus not suitable for accurate
competition performance predictions in swimming.

Fig. 50 Based on the nearly constant slope of the lactate curve per
stroke, distance and gender, the test distance may be swum only
once. One plotted point in the lactate-speed diagram will then define
where to draw the lactate curve (a). Limitation of reliability of the
lactate curve drawn up after a 1-Speed test: due to small variations in
the slope of the lactate curve, the probability of a significant
estimation error on speed for a desired lactate value (= err) or vice
versa becomes more important the more the wanted lactate value is
removed from the measured concentration (b) and (c). It is therefore
important to limit the interpretation of the lactate-speed relation

within a lactate range of ☐ 4 mmol/l around the measured lactate
value but above 2.5 mmol/l.
The combination of a submaximal 1-Speed test in freestyle with an all-out
1-Speed test in the swimmer’s specialty stroke may provide, for the same
time and cost, more information than a 2-Speed test. Indeed, it gives:
*
a very good indication on the swimmer’s aerobic endurance and
subsequently on the appropriate training intensities for freestyle
* an idea of the swimmer’s aerobic endurance and of the appropriate
training intensities in the specialty stroke when the all-out test is
performed over at least 200 m
* an indication on the swimmer’s anaerobic capacity in his specialty
stroke
Depending on the swimmers’ specialty, we designed following
combinations of 1-Speed tests (tab. 9).

For freestyle and butterfly swimmers the test procedure consists of one 400
m free at submaximal speed (about 20 seconds above 400 m best time) and
one all-out 100 m swim in respectively freestyle or fly.

Breaststroke, backstroke and top butterfly swimmers should theoretically be
tested over a 400 m in freestyle at submaximal speed followed by a
submaximal 400 m and a 100 m all-out effort in their respective discipline.
For financial reasons this protocol can be reduced to a submaximal 400 m
freestyle and a 200 m all-out effort in the swimmer’s specialty. The 400 m
freestyle because, even for these swimmers, the greatest part of the training
is carried out in freestyle, making the assessment of the training intensity in
this stroke necessary. The 200 m distance because it provides fairly reliable
information on both the aerobic and anaerobic metabolic performance in the
swimmers’ specialty stroke.
If the swimmers’ performance level becomes better and some more money
can be invested, you can add a 200 m submaximal 1-Speed test in their best
stroke between the 400 m submaximal swim and the maximal effort. The
all-out test will then be a 100 m max. This variation of the test protocol is
useful for breaststroke, backstroke and top level fly swimmers.
Individual medley swimmers will be subjected to a submaximal 400 m
freestyle and a 200 m medley swum at maximal speed. The all-out test can
sometimes vary according to the objective of the next training period. If, for
example, during the base training period, breaststroke has to be improved,
the 200 m medley will be replaced by a 200 m breaststroke all-out or a 200
m breaststroke 1-Speed test at submaximal speed will be added to the test
program in-between the submaximal 400 m freestyle and the 200 m medley
all-out.
The choice of test stroke and test protocol depends thus very much on the
information the coach wishes to gain about the conditioning of his swimmer
and on the swimmers’ performance level.
Evaluation of the Conditioning Profile
Aerobic Endurance - The 400 m freestyle, and to a smaller extent the 200
m, swum at submaximal speed are very important tests since they enable to
determine the swimmer’s aerobic endurance. A simple reference of the
lactate curve to quantify the aerobic endurance is the swimming speed
reached at 4 mmol/l lactate on the 400 m (V4400 ) or 200 m (V4200 ) (male,
fig. 51; female fig. 52).
With some caution (see Shift of the Lactate Curve and fig. 58) we can state
that the faster the speed at 4 mmol/l lactate over 400 and 200 m, the better

the aerobic endurance. A 100 m lactate test, on the other hand, is too short
to give a reliable picture of the aerobic endurance.

Fig. 51 Mean 4 mmol/l lactate speeds (V4) on 100, 200 and 400 m for male
swimmers according to their performance level in competition (World
Class, European, national and regional level). The V4 on 400 and 200 m
can be used to assess the swimmers’ aerobic endurance. sd = standard
deviation.

Fig. 52 Mean 4 mmol/l lactate speeds (V4) on 100, 200 and 400 m for
female swimmers according to their performance level in competition
(World Class, European, national and regional level). The V4 on 400 and
200 m can be used to assess the swimmers’ aerobic endurance. sd =
standard deviation.
It must however be noted that the 4 mmol/l lactate speed:
* should not be considered as the anaerobic threshold and not as the
unique and best training intensity for endurance training
* may have a different meaning for different swimmers
It has been demonstrated that the stronger the swimmer’s aerobic capacity,
the greater also the contribution of the anaerobic lactic energy system to
reach a certain lactate value (Olbrecht 1989). With respect to the 4 mmol/l
lactate concentration at the end of a single 200 and/or 400 m swim, we
found that the well endurance trained World class swimmer produces up to
25% more lactate per minute than the swimmer of a regional level with a
weaker aerobic capacity (fig. 53).
As a higher uptake of oxygen leads to a greater elimination of
lactate/pyruvate during exercise, the well endurance trained swimmer will

have to produce more pyruvate/lactate per minute and to deliver more
anaerobic work to reach the same concentration of lactate at the end of the
exercise. The percentage of the total energy supply contributed by the
aerobic and anaerobic metabolism to achieve 4 mmol/l lactate does change
clearly when varying the test distance but is only slightly affected by the
performance level of the swimmer.

Fig. 53 Oxygen uptake (VO2 ) and production of lactate (VLa) as well as
the share of the total energy supply (%Wtot ) provided by the anaerobic
lactic (%WLA ), anaerobic alactic (%WAL ) and aerobic metabolism (%WO2 )
at various 4 mmol/l speeds over a single 200 (V4200 ) and 400 m (V4400 ). R,
N, E and W stand for the swimmer’s performance level: regional, national,
European or World class.
Experimental studies (a.o. Madsen 1982) have corroborated that a swimmer
with a low anaerobic capacity (cannot produce much lactate per minute) has
to invest a higher percentage of his aerobic capacity to attain the same
lactate reading as his swim mate with a higher anaerobic capacity. Elite
long distance swimmers with a strong aerobic but mostly a low anaerobic
capacity, invest some 90% of their measured maximum oxygen uptake at

the 4 mmol/l lactate speed. Elite sprinters, on the other hand, with both a
strong aerobic and anaerobic capacity, reach 85% of their maximum oxygen
uptake at this 4 mmol/l lactate speed (less aerobic capacity, less
lactate/pyruvate elimination, earlier lactate accumulation, lower %VO2 max
at 4 mmol/l). Less endurance trained student swimmers attain at 4 mmol/l
about 78% of their measured maximum oxygen uptake (fig. 54).

Fig. 54 Influence of a low and high aerobic and anaerobic capacity on the
percentage of maximum aerobic capacity (%VO2 max) that is reached at 4
mmol/l (see text).
Anaerobic Performance - The short all-out effort (200 or 100 m 1-Speed
test or a 50/100 m competition lactate concentration) is useful to estimate
the swimmers’ anaerobic capacity. With some caution (see fig. 59) we can
say that the higher the post all-out maximal lactate value, the better the
anaerobic capacity. This maximal lactate concentration, however, is only a
rough estimation of the anaerobic capacity (VLamax) and will never be as
reliable as the VLamax calculated by the simulation program (see
Advanced Lactate Test).
Because the simulation approach is not available to everyone yet, we set up
a chart of criteria to characterize and help confirm the swimmers’ levels of

aerobic and anaerobic capacities (tab. 10, Capacities’ Level Chart). By
means of this table the coach can typify and place his swimmers in one of
the 4 categories below:
1. swimmers with a high aerobic and a low anaerobic capacity
2. swimmers with a high aerobic and a high anaerobic capacity
3. swimmers with a low aerobic and a low anaerobic capacity
4. swimmers with a low aerobic and a high anaerobic capacity
This typification is very important to reduce the risks of misinterpreting test
results and of providing wrong training advice from the classic, less
sophisticated standard lactate tests.
Let’s take an example:
A lactate test (e.g. a 400 m freestyle submaximal 1-Speed test followed by
15 min active rest and a 100 m freestyle 1-Speed test all-out) revealed a
good aerobic endurance (e.g. a high 4 mmol/l lactate speed on 400 m) and a
low maximal lactate level after the short all-out effort (the 100 m freestyle
max.). Based on the classic interpretation method these test results indicate
that the swimmer has a good aerobic but a low anaerobic capacity. If this
diagnosis fits with the swimmer’s typification by means of the Capacities’
Level Chart (tab. 10), the coach may be quite confident about the
interpretation of the lactate readings. If, on the other hand, the typification
refutes the lactate results, i.e. a high anaerobic capacity deduced from the
chart versus a low anaerobic capacity derived from the lactate results,
caution is recommended. This contradiction may indicate that the low
maximal lactate value after the 100 m freestyle all-out is not due to a weak
anaerobic capacity but rather to a lack of anaerobic power (low use of
anaerobic capacity). The analysis of the completed training period will shed
light and provide evidence to corroborate this hypothesis.
Whether the training for the next period should be adapted or not as a result
of this conditioning profile (high aerobic and anaerobic capacity and low
anaerobic power) will actually depend on the current training period:
In the base training period there is no
need for special training adjustments except to avoid training

exercises such as voluminous extensive workouts which could
further break down the aerobic power
In the pre-competition training period, on the other
hand, the anaerobic power exercises have to receive the highest
priority

The example just provided shows that it is extremely important to
“confront” the classic interpretation of the lactate readings with the
Capacities’ Level Chart in order to validate the “lactate based” training
advice and training objectives for the next period. In the case of a

contradictory diagnosis (classic interpretation of a standard lactate test
versus Capacities’ Level Chart) always choose for the least risky training
advice. If your judgment results in training that is too “soft”, it is always
possible to catch up later, however, once you have gone too far, i.e. trained
too hard, it may take up to 6 weeks to recover.
Determination of the Training Objectives
Lactate tests also permit a prognosis of the competition results. This, of
course, should not be a goal in itself but it helps to “track” shortcomings in
the swimmer’s conditioning. The close relationship between the speed at 4
mmol/l lactate and the speed in competition allows for example, to check
whether the swimmer’s aerobic endurance is strong enough to achieve the
competition time he hopes for (fig. 55).
Suppose a swimmer wishes to swim a time of 4:11 min in a 400 m freestyle
competition. According to figure 55, he will have to get a 4 mmol/l speed of
1.457 m/s (4:35 min) over 400 m freestyle. If the 400 m freestyle lactate
test reveals a 4 mmol/l time slower than 4:35 min, a shortfall in aerobic
endurance will be diagnosed. Depending on the remaining time before the
main competition the swimmer is preparing for, the coach may have to
spend more time on improving the deficient aerobic capacity and to delay
the pre-competition fine-tuning.

Fig. 55 Relation between the 4 mmol/l lactate speed over 400 m freestyle
(V4400 ) and the 400 m freestyle competition speed.
If the established 4 mmol/l lactate speed is only slightly slower than 4:35
min and, if the swimmer can reach high lactate readings in competition, the
shortfall in endurance can be compensated for with a strong anaerobic
capacity (high lactate readings) or anaerobic power. In this case, if it fits
with the periodization, the coach can start the pre-competition fine-tuning
as scheduled.
If the swimmer reaches a 4 mmol/l lactate speed, which is faster than 4:35
min, he is theoretically capable of realizing his competition goal (4:11 min).
If he is, nevertheless, unsuccessful in swimming this goal time in
competition, his failing can be blamed on a shortfall in either anaerobic or
aerobic power (utilization of respectively the anaerobic and aerobic
capacity). A comparison of the actual training structure and lactate readings
with those of previous mesocycles will then help in figuring out the
reason(s) for the current shortfall (anaerobic or aerobic power) and in
selecting the objectives for the next training period.

The importance of the anaerobic capacity increases for short competitions
and therefore must also be reckoned with when the lactate results predict
competition performances that are actually beyond the swimmer’s grasp.
A shortfall in anaerobic capacity can be deduced from the lactate readings
registered after a short maximal test. If these readings are high, it is the
aerobic and to a smaller extent the anaerobic power that need to be
improved. If, on the other hand, they are low, the anaerobic capacity will be
polished up first and only then the anaerobic power.
Assessment of Training Intensity and Volume
Intensity - Experiments have enabled us to statistically establish changes in
the relationship between lactate and swimming speed according to the
different types of exercises used in training (Olbrecht 1985). We can
estimate the blood lactate concentrations for different swimming speeds on
series of 100, 200 and 400 m intervals with 10 and 30 seconds rest as well
as blood lactates during long distance swims lasting at least 20 minutes
from a single 400 m swim (fig. 56 for freestyle). This estimation is different
for males and females and is based on group averages. It is therefore
advisable to check by lactate measurements during training (spot lactate
tests) whether these calculations need to be individually adjusted.
This calculation model enables the coach to individualize the intensities
(swimming speed) of the different workouts according to the swimmer’s
conditioning profile in order to make sure he reaches the required blood
lactate concentrations corresponding to the training objectives by the end of
the set.

Fig. 56Computer print-out of the results of a 400 m freestyle 1-Speed test
swum at submaximal speed. ☐ Measured time and lactate, ☐ calculated
relationship between swimming speed/time and lactate for a single swim of
400 m, ☐ statistical prediction of swimming times for series of 100, 200
and 400 m repeats with 10 and 30 sec rest breaks as well as for a continuous

swimming lasting more than 20 minutes, ☐ overview of the most
important test results. REG = regeneration, EXE = extensive endurance,
MIE = middle intensive endurance, INE = intensive endurance, EAN =
extensive anaerobic training.
Thus, according to figure 56 Freddie Fast should be able to swim a series of
200 m freestyle with 10 seconds rest in 2:21 min if the coach wants him to
train around 2 mmol/l lactate. If the coach wants his swimmer to complete a
400 m repeat set with 30 seconds rest at a blood lactate concentration of 4
mmol/l, the latter will have to cover each 400 m in about 4:35 min. A
continuous long distance swim at 3 mmol/l will have to be completed at
1:12 min per 100 m.
The computer print-out (fig. 56) is essentially an aid for the coach. It
enables the coach to link, for every tested swimmer, the swimming speed
during training to an objective measure of intensity. Whether the swimmer
has to train at 1, 2, 3, 4 or above 4 mmol/l lactate, how often he is going to
do that per week and to what extent, will depend on the characteristics of
his current conditioning profile as determined by the results of the lactate
tests.
Since the conditioning profiles can vary a great deal from swimmer to
swimmer, training intensity and volume may also vary individually despite
the same training objectives, the same training period and the same
competition event to prepare.
For example distance swimmers will normally have to swim endurance
training sets at lower lactate concentrations than sprinters to avoid the
overload of their aerobic and anaerobic systems. This finding, supported by
scientific evidence (see Interpretation of Lactate Readings in Training),
actually concurred with the empirical observations of coaches working with
lactate in training. They noted that, during submaximal workouts, sprinters
reach higher blood lactate values than long distance swimmers, are less
fatigued and regenerate faster. But, although sprinters, in comparison to
long distance swimmers, mostly have a higher anaerobic capacity, this high
anaerobic capacity is relative as it can greatly vary within the same type of
swimmers.
So, when possible, the coach should estimate the swimmer’s anaerobic
capacity by means of lactate values in short all-out races (50 - 100 m), by

lactate after a short maximal effort in training (100 m), by the Capacities’
Level Chart or by the simulation program to assess the physiological impact
of a workout at a given lactate concentration.
As a matter of fact, if high concentrations of lactate are registered during
short distance testing in training or in competition, the lactate readings in
training may also be somewhat higher. On the other hand, when the
maximum readings are low, training will need to be completed with great
caution, i.e. at low lactate concentrations. Furthermore, swimmers who
reach low maximum lactate readings during these short distance testings in
training or in competition usually have a distorted feeling of intensity (hard
exercise is felt as light), as a result of which they often swim too fast in
training. These findings certainly point to the importance of using a lactate
test that includes both a submaximal and maximal swim.
Volume - The aerobic endurance (V4 on 400 m) can also be used as an
indicator for the training volume a swimmer can sustain (tab. 11). Indeed,
the better his V4, the more training units per week and/or the more distance
per training he is able to complete without over-loading. The training
frequencies and mileage per training session presented in table 11 prevail
during the largest part of the training season. It is clear that during training
camps, the coach will take the opportunity to serve up more training units
per week and higher volumes per session. During taper or regenerative
periods, on the other hand, where the recovery of the swimmer is of primary
importance (after illness or overtraining for example), training frequencies
and volume per session will remain lower than indicated in the table.

Advanced Lactate Test: Simulation of the Aerobic and
Anaerobic Capacities The most important physiological parameters to
describe the conditioning profile in swimming are the aerobic (VO2 max)
and anaerobic (VLamax) capacities. These parameters play a decisive part
not only in determining the swimmer’s maximal competition performance
but also in the way the aerobic and anaerobic systems contribute in the
metabolic energy supply during exercise.
With the advanced evaluation model for the interpretation of lactate tests
(Olbrecht 1989) by means of a simulation program that was patterned after
Prof. Mader’s - German University of Sports Sciences of Cologne theoretical model of metabolism, we can now determine both the aerobic
and anaerobic capacities of technically well skilled competitive swimmers.
Unlike the classical method of interpretation, where the assessment of the
conditioning is directly based on the relation between lactate and speed, i.e.
the position of the lactate curve in the lactate-speed diagram, this new
evaluation technique uses the lactate values to determine the 2 decisive
factors - the aerobic (VO2 max) and anaerobic capacities (VLamax) - that
generate the lactate-speed relation.
These
capacities:

are thus the key
factors in the determination of the individual
metabolic profile

can be used to
simulate on computer the individual metabolic
response that can be expected on different types
of training exercises. According to the results of
the simulation we then decide whether the
metabolic reaction induced by a workout serves
the purpose of the training objectives or not

A comparison between the measured and simulated oxygen uptake (VO2 )
and lactate during different submaximal running efforts has shown a very
close similarity (fig. 57).
This approach is thus quite different from most other lactate testing
procedures which, to describe the conditioning profile of the swimmer, use:
* a single speed such as the speed at the lactate or some other
anaerobic threshold (e.g. the speed at 4 mmol/l) or,
* the slope and/or shape of the lactate curve

Fig. 57 Measured and simulated oxygen uptake (VO2 , left) and lactate
(right) at different submaximal running efforts have proven to be quite
similar (Olbrecht 1992).
Indeed, this new model discloses the metabolic process behind blood lactate
values and provides insight into the often paradoxical evaluations of the
conditioning profile as well as the often contradictory and discrepant
training advice emanating from the classical method of interpretation.
A comparison between the classic interpretation of the shift of the lactate
curve (move to the right and the left is explained by respectively an increase
and decrease of VO2 max; see Interpretation of the Lactate Curve) and the

interpretation based on the use of the simulation program for determining
the aerobic and anaerobic capacities, reveals that:
* only about 60% of the classic interpretations of the aerobic capacity
fits with the more sophisticated valuation (fig. 58). This means that out
of 5 lactate tests classically evaluated, on average 2 interpretations are
incorrect and will inevitably lead to a wrong training advice
* an improvement or deterioration in a 100 m all-out test can only be
explained by respectively an improved or deteriorated anaerobic
capacity in 50% of the cases (fig. 59)

Fig. 58 About 60% of the classic interpretations of the aerobic capacity
(VO2 max) fits in with the more sophisticated valuation.

Fig. 59 An improvement or deterioration in a 100 m all-out test (Lamax)
can only be explained by respectively an improved or deteriorated
anaerobic capacity (VLamax) in 50% of the cases.
Why simulate VO 2 max when it is possible to measure it?
It is indeed possible to measure the maximal oxygen uptake but the results
are hardly ever correct, not to mention representative. As a matter of fact to
be somewhat representative, the VO2 max of a swimmer has to be measured
by free swimming in the swimming pool (possibly also in a swimming
flume, although not every flume is suitable) and not on a cycle ergometer or
a treadmill (see Relevance and Reliability of the Lactate Readings). This,
however, is time consuming and requires considerable expertise.
Besides, the equipment for oxygen uptake measurements is expensive, quite
delicate and sensitive to error. Let’s give an example: an error of 100
ml/min (+ 50 ml/min) is quite a good standard in VO2 max measurements.
For a swimmer of 70 kg this represents an error of 1.43 ml/kg/min. This
very same error in oxygen uptake results in a difference in time of about 1.5
sec per 100 m for swimmers. It is, thus, not possible by means of VO2 max
measurements to make a reliable distinction between 2 swimmers if their
best times do not differ by more than 1.5 sec per 100 m. In other words, the
accuracy of the oxygen uptake values is insufficient to distinguish between
2 swimmers who cover a 400 m freestyle in, respectively, 4:44 and 4:50.

The accuracy of the lactate readings on the other hand allows us to discern
between 2 swimmers whose 400 m freestyle best time differs by only 1
second. It is, thus, clear that the lactate test enables a much more accurate
analysis of the metabolic profile.
Moreover, to measure VO2 max, the swimmer has to wear a mask, which
considerably increases the water resistance, seriously hinders and impedes
him and, last but not least, undermines his motivation.
We can conclude that measuring oxygen uptake:
* brings about a lot of practical and financial problems
* lacks the power to determine with enough accuracy the metabolic
profile of elite swimmers
* limits the swim specific relevance of the test results when compared
with lactate readings
Due to the specific dynamics of oxygen uptake no test protocol will ever be
able to assess directly the real VO2 max. The measured VO2 max will
always be underestimated. By means of our simulation program, however,
we are able to calculate VO2 max and this calculated maximal oxygen
uptake always turns out to be higher than the measured one.
Test Protocol
The input for the simulation program are the times, distances and postexercise lactate readings of different submaximal 1-Speed tests. The swims
are separated by a rest period to get the swimmer back to “resting” lactate
and oxygen uptake levels. It is important to start each interval from a
resting lactate level to avoid any interaction with the post-exercise reading.
For example, a swimmer performs a 400 m, 200 m, 150 m and 100 m
backstroke in one test session. Each interval will be swum at a constant and
submaximal speed but will be progressively faster as the distance becomes
shorter.
Lactate readings will be determined in the 1st, 3rd and if necessary also in
the 5th minute after each swim. The rest period between the swims should
be of approximately 10-20 min; 5-15 min of active rest during which the
swimmer is asked to swim at regeneration speed in order to get back to a

“resting” lactate and at least 5 min of passive rest to get back to “resting”
oxygen uptake values.
After this rest period, he can then start the next interval. Breaststroke and
freestyle swimmers follow the same test protocol but in their respective best
stroke. Butterfly swimmers will swim the freestyle program. Individual
medley swimmers will perform the test in the stroke the coach wants to
stress in training.
The objective of our evaluation algorithm is to parse the post-exercise
lactate readings into the contribution and peak value of both the aerobic and
anaerobic metabolic processes. The traditional “step test” is therefore only
partially appropriate for this type of evaluation method. The simulation
program calculates:
* VO2 max and VLamax (respectively the aerobic and anaerobic
capacities)
* the contribution of aerobic and anaerobic energy supply for different
type of exercises at different levels of lactate
* the lactate elimination rates during different exercises as well as the
maximal elimination rate
* the maximal lactate steady state (MaxLass , lactate elimination =
production)
* the anaerobic power
This simulation model has been validated with more than 800 tests in
swimmers ranging from age group swimmers to World champions but
should, as it is quite elaborate and expensive to use, be currently reserved
for athletes of at least national level.
Evaluation of the Conditioning Profile
We have evaluated over 200 elite swimmers in the last 6 years using this
simulation approach. Figure 60 presents the mean aerobic and anaerobic
capacity results observed in female and male sprinters, middle and long
distance swimmers. In table 12 you will find the results of the top 3
swimmers for each stroke (freestyle, backstroke, butterfly (test in freestyle)
and breaststroke).

Fig. 60 Mean aerobic and anaerobic capacity calculated for female and
male sprinters, middle and long distance swimmers. Due to the specific
dynamics of the oxygen uptake, the measured VO2 max will always be
underestimated.

Aerobic Capacity - It is quite easy to evaluate the aerobic capacity as it can
never be too high. Globally we can state that, whatever the swimmers’ type
(sprinter or long distance swimmer), the higher his aerobic capacity the
better:
* his chances of a good performance in competition

* his ability to handle and assimilate more training volume, higher
training intensities and longer mesocycles
Anaerobic Capacity - The evaluation of the anaerobic capacity, on the
other hand, is much more difficult. First, it is the event the swimmer is
preparing for, that determines what level of anaerobic capacity is expedient.
A 50 m sprinter, for example, should have a very high anaerobic capacity
(>0.9 mmol/l/kg/min) as a high level provides him with a lot of energy in a
very short period of time and allows him to maintain his maximum sprint
speed till near the end of the 50 m. This huge delivery of energy will, of
course, provoke a sudden and strong acidosis in the muscle, but since the
event only lasts 22 to 35 sec, the onset of the inhibition of the anaerobic
lactic system due to this acidosis will only occur in the very last part of the
race.
The longer the distance of the competition event, the lower the anaerobic
capacity has to be in order to:
* avoid a premature inhibition of the anaerobic system due to the
acidosis it induces at its maximal contribution during the race (=
anaerobic power)
* enable the aerobic capacity to be involved as much as possible (=
maximizing the anaerobic power)
Secondly, the evaluation of the swimmer’s anaerobic capacity also depends
on his level of aerobic capacity. Indeed, a better aerobic capacity allows a
higher contribution of the anaerobic capacity for the same onset of acidosis.
This means extra benefit in terms of energy delivery, as more energy will be
supplied not only by the aerobic but also by the anaerobic chain before an
inhibition of the energy production due to the acidosis sets in. The
simulation program can estimate the optimal anaerobic capacity for a given
aerobic capacity and competition event (stroke and distance).
Determination of the Training Objectives
The huge advantage of the simulation program is that it opens a window on
the metabolic processes behind the “numbers (= lactate readings and
speed)”. Training objectives are now fixed according to the strengths and
weaknesses of the aerobic and anaerobic metabolic systems with respect to
the competition event the swimmer is preparing for.

The periodization is the other essential factor that influences the
determination of the training objectives. During the base training period,
priority is given to the improvement of the aerobic and, if necessary, also of
the anaerobic capacity. If it is, indeed, the anaerobic capacity that needs to
be improved, the coach will not increase the volume of the anaerobic
capacity sets but instead raise their frequency per week by either adding an
extra anaerobic capacity training session in some weeks or by programming
an anaerobic capacity set as the intensive part of an aerobic capacity
workout. Moreover, the effect of the anaerobic capacity sets should be
screened off from any negative interference with surrounding workouts
such as too voluminous exercises. Long distance swimmers may, during
this training period, have an anaerobic capacity that is somewhat too high
since it decreases the risk of overloading the aerobic energy system and so
protects them from overtraining.
If, on the other hand, the anaerobic capacity is strong enough, the coach can
increase the training volume and design the intensive part of the aerobic
capacity workouts with whatever intense exercise, even an aerobic power
like mini-set.
During the pre-competition training period (i.e. the peak form inducing part
of the competition period) the objective normally is for the long distance
swimmers to improve their aerobic power and for the sprinters to raise their
anaerobic power. But, since the potential to build up aerobic or anaerobic
power strongly depends on the level of the respective capacities, the coach
may decide to break the rule. That is to adapt, to a certain extent, the
principal objective of this training period and to first focus on minor
adjustments of the anaerobic capacity in order to establish a better balance
between both capacities before building up the required power. Ideally the
balance between both capacities should already be established at the end of
the base training period, but practice shows that this is only rarely the case.
The length of the pre-competition training period and the frequency of the
power workouts will also be adjusted according to the acquired level of
both capacities. Sprinters with both a high anaerobic and aerobic capacity
will not only need a longer pre-competition training period but will also
need more anaerobic power training sets than those with a lower anaerobic
capacity. Long distance swimmers with a very low anaerobic capacity will,
whatever the level of their aerobic capacity, clearly need only a few aerobic

power workouts to reach peak form. On the other hand, long distance
swimmers combining a high aerobic with a good anaerobic capacity will
need a longer pre-competition training period and more sets of aerobic
power training than the distance swimmers with a lower anaerobic capacity.
Assessment of Training Intensity and Volume
With the classic 1- or 2-Speed test we are able to determine for each tested
swimmer the swimming speed for sets of 100, 200 and 400 m fractions
(interval distances) or for a continuous swim that will lead to the desired
blood lactate concentration at the end of the workout (see fig. 56). This test,
however, does not provide any evidence whether this desired blood lactate
concentration meets the intensity fitting in with the objective of the
exercise.
Since we are now able to reproduce swim efforts on computer, we can
check, prior to the execution of the training set, which blood lactate
concentration fits with the metabolic activity we want to induce in the
muscle (see fig. 45). This makes the characterization of the training stimuli
much more accurate. The proactive check together with the findings from
the analysis of the previous training periods, that show how each swimmer
responds to the different types of training exercises, determine the
allocation of the correct intensity to the objective of the training set. This is
particularly important for aerobic endurance sets, since this group of
workouts is most sensitive to an inappropriate intensity (mostly too high).

Heart Rate

The heart rate is a frequently used, but nevertheless coarse and inaccurate,
parameter for determining training intensity. There are several reasons for
this:
1. the heart rate reflects the heart’s reaction to numerous internal and
external stimuli. The physical stress during training is certainly an
important internal stimulus, but is not the only factor that
influences the pulse rate. Indeed, at a same training intensity the
swimmer’s heart rate may vary depending on his mental stress, his
degree of tiredness and the condition of his health, but also
according to external environmental factors, such as the
temperature, the wind and the length of the set. The heart rate,
therefore, reflects more than just the degree of metabolic activity
during exertion
2. slight differences in heart rate during training can, furthermore, be
coupled with great shifts in the nature of the exercise. Training
with the same heart rate can, therefore, mean a different type of
training from day to day. If you also take into account the
influence of the external environmental factors mentioned above,
then, despite accurate measurements, the heart rate cannot be
regarded as a reliable means of checking training intensity (tab.
13) or defining the type of exercise

What will the appropriate pulse rate be if we want to train at 3 mmol/l
lactate?
According to the table above the appropriate pulse rate for this
swimmer will be 162-163. But, we know that the pulse rate can easily
swing 2 beats per minute either way depending on mental stress,
degree of fatigue, health condition and lots of external environmental
factors. This means that you can never be sure whether this pulse rate
of 162 beats per minute today corresponds to 160 or 164 beats per
minute. The preceding table, furthermore, teaches us that a discrepancy
of 4 heart beats per minute will quickly be accompanied by a variation
in lactate of about 2 mmol/l. How is it then possible to advise a precise
intensity for this swimmer via the heart rate even if we still grant that
an electronic heart rate monitor gives an accurate pulse rate
measurement? If you determine the heart rate by counting the number
of heart beats over ten seconds, then your level of accuracy will decline
by at least 6 beats per minute either way. Would it then not be more
accurate to ask for a swimming time of 1:21 - 1:22?
3. the heart rate is also very dependent on the training an athlete is
accustomed to doing. The swimmer who often trains intensely
will, after a time, tend more quickly towards slower heart rates
during intense training exercises; on the other hand a swimmer
who normally takes it easy will quite quickly reach faster heart
rates at the slightest increase of training intensity
4. finally, it is impossible to determine the contribution of aerobic
and anaerobic work by reading the heart rate. One may reach 140
bpm in training but what does that 140 bpm tell us about how
good or how weak the anaerobic capacity is or about the
percentage of anaerobic work that was done? The heart rate does
not tell us anything about what happens in the muscle
The preceding argument does not mean, however, that the heart rate is a
useless control parameter.
1. It is of great importance to convince swimmers to vary training
intensities. Coupling training tasks to different heart rates can
“encourage” the swimmer not to train at the same tempo repeat
after repeat and set after set. Nevertheless, the heart rate does not

unequivocally typify the nature and degree of metabolic activity
during exertion (high or low uptake of oxygen, production and
elimination of lactate, ratio of aerobic and anaerobic work). As a
result, neither the nature of the training exercise nor its effect can
be determined accurately on the basis of the heart rate
Example: a heart rate of 140 beats per minute may not be the optimum
intensity for endurance training for some swimmers, but the coupling
of this heart rate to the training task will, nevertheless, prevent many
swimmers from completing the exercise too quickly

In this context we must also be critical of the value of the “Conconi
Test (heart rate deflection point)”. Training at different percentages of
the heart rate deflection point may certainly induce meaningful
variations in intensity, but nevertheless this will not give us insight into
the metabolic reactions that lie behind the heart frequencies (fig. 61).
Missing this insight may not be so dramatic for recreational athletes
but makes a scientific monitoring of training with elite swimmers
impossible since you can never evaluate what training stimulus evoked
what metabolic reaction

Fig. 61 Higher heart rates after a lactate steady state exercise (7 x 300 m,
Rest: 30 sec at the swimming speed corresponding to Conconi’s flexion
point) are not related to post-exercise lactate values.
2. The fact that the heart rate reflects more than the metabolic
reaction to an exertion stimulus certainly causes the heart rate to
be a valuable means for evaluating the general condition of the
whole organism. Heart rates can tell us how well the body handles
training in combination with other factors such as strength
training, acclimatization to altitude (fig. 62), health, tiredness and
so on. In this respect we can appeal to the morning heart rate
which is measured by counting the heartbeats during one whole
minute while still lying. A higher than usual morning heart rate for
more than 3 days is a clear sign that there is something wrong.
This problem may be related to training but may have other
origins too; nevertheless, it is a signal requiring a thorough
analysis of the training and the environment

Fig. 62 Observance of fluctuations in morning pulse before, during and
after quite a long training period in altitude and under the influence of
strength training (middle graph) and health problems (top graph).
Also a higher than normal heart rate during frequently recurring sets at
submaximal swimming intensities in combination with lower than
normal maximal heart rates during all-out sets clearly indicate fatigue,
emerging health problems or excessive training. These symptoms are,
it is true, not serious in themselves, but get in the way of training
adaptations and are an invitation to a careful and global (training and
environment) analysis/evaluation of the last 14 days of training

Percentage of Best Times
Studies show that the training intensity can be calculated more precisely
based on a percentage of the best times than on the heart rate (Olbrecht
1997). Table 14 contains the percentages of best times at 100, 200 and 400

m for male and female swimmers, which can be used for calculating the
training intensity of the 100, 200 and 400 m series respectively, each with at
least 30 sec rest.

To be able to use the percentage of best time exactly, it is important to know
if the swimmer is anaerobically strong (AS) or anaerobically weak (AW). It
is generally assumed that sprinters are anaerobically strong and thus are
classified in the AS category while the long distance swimmers are
classified as anaerobically weak (AW). However, a lactate value after a
competition as well as the Capacities’ Level Chart (tab. 10) allow a more
precise categorization of AS or AW. The respective percentage of best time
should also be lowered between 1 and 2% if the rest between the intervals is
short (10 - 20 sec).
If the coach does not know whether the anaerobic capacity is weak or
strong, these percentages may lead to the prescription of erroneous training
intensities. For example, table 14 shows that a 5 x 400 m freestyle series at
87% of the personal freestyle best time corresponds to an endurance
training (lactate = 2) for an anaerobically weak female swimmer (AW) and
to a mixed aerobic/anaerobic training session (lactate = 6) for an
anaerobically strong swimmer. These 2 swimmers completing the same
series (5 x 400 m freestyle with 30 sec rest) at the same percentage of their

best times (87% in this example) are experiencing very different training
intensities.
Anaerobically strong (AS) and anaerobically weak (AW) swimmers activate
the 3 energy supply systems in a different way for identical percentages of
their best times. Let’s take the example of 2 swimmers, each having the
same 400 m freestyle best time (4:30.0); supposing the AS swimmer
registers 15.5 mmol/l lactate in a 400 m freestyle competition, while the
AW swimmer reaches 10.2 mmol/l lactate. If both get the same swimming
assignment, for example 5 x 400 m freestyle at 87% of their best time, i.e.
5:05.0, they will swim each 400 m some 35 seconds slower than their best
time. Since in a 400 m freestyle 1 mmol/l lactate corresponds to a time
difference of about 4.2 sec, we can roughly estimate that the lactate
concentration will be about 8.3 mmol/l (35 sec/4.2 sec) lower than in
competition. The calculated 87% of the personal best time thus means a
moderately intense aerobic/anaerobic training session (15.5 - 8.3 = 7.2
mmol/l) for the anaerobically strong swimmer (AS), while the same 87%
represents endurance training (10.2 - 8.3 = 1.9 mmol/l) for the anaerobically
weak swimmer (AW).
The determination of the training intensity based on a percentage of the best
time is not “foolproof”, but this method is more precise than specifying
workout intensities based exclusively on the swimmer’s subjective feeling
of intensity or his heart rate.

The 30-Minute Test or T30
As we have seen in a previous section, both the swimmer’s aerobic and
anaerobic capacities are essential components in the determination of the
training objectives and training intensities and can be assessed quite well
by lactate tests. But, not every swimming club has the financial means to
have these tests done. Therefore, we have sought out other less expensive
forms of testing. The 30-minute test (T30) provides a fairly accurate
estimation of the swimmer’s endurance and offers an acceptable alternative
for the 400 m lactate test.
The evaluation of the aerobic capacity by the 30-minute test is of course
not as accurate as using lactate tests, but nevertheless it enables the coach
to:

*
*
*

measure the swimmer’s aerobic endurance
purposefully build up the training
calculate the training intensity for the endurance exercises

This test requires the swimmer to swim as far as possible in 30 min at a
steady speed. The first time the swimmer uses this type of test he can aim
for times that are 1 to 2 sec/100 m slower than his 1500 m or 800 m split
times.
This test can also be conceived as a training exercise. The swimmers start
by the minute and the coach stops each swimmer individually between 29
min 40 sec and 30 min 20 sec always at the end of a lap. He then registers
the final time and the total distance each swimmer completed. The distance
covered should then be converted to the distance that would have been
covered at the same steady swimming speed in exactly 30 min. Therefore
we use following formula:

Research has shown that the average swimming speed recorded during the
30-minute test (total distance/time in seconds) corresponds closely to the
aerobic capacity determined by lactate tests (fig. 63). It was established that
generally the longer the distance swum in 30 min, the better the aerobic
endurance. The average swimming speed of the swimmers with a very
strong aerobic endurance is lower than the 4 mmol/l lactate speed of the 400
m submaximal lactate test. Swimmers with a weaker aerobic endurance, on
the other hand, are capable of completing the 30-minute test at a higher
velocity than the 4 mmol/l lactate speed of 400 m submaximal lactate test.

Fig. 63 Relation between the 4 mmol/l swimming speed and the swimming
speed (total distance) during a 30 min maximal test.
This form of testing allows not only to estimate the aerobic capacity based
on the distance swum in about 30 min, but also to derive swim times for a
few classic extensive and intensive endurance training sets (table 15 and 16
for resp. female and male swimmers aged 14 and up).

Caution about the 30-minute test:
The 30-minute test cannot replace the lactate test as it does not estimate the
swimmer’s anaerobic capacity. Moreover, for the calculation of the aerobic
capacity we have to rely on the average contribution of anaerobic energy at
maximal effort during 30 min of swimming. If, then a swimmer with an

anaerobic capacity that is above average puts more anaerobic energy into
the 30-minute test and swims a few dozen meters more because of his
anaerobic input, the total distance swum will overestimate the true aerobic
capacity. A swimmer with a weak anaerobic capacity, on the other hand,
will use only little anaerobic energy in the 30-minute test, causing his
aerobic capacity to be somewhat underestimated.
By way of example:
Swimmers A and B cover the same distance (e.g. 2075 m) during the 30
min maximal continuous swimming test. If swimmer B has a better
anaerobic capacity and uses more anaerobic energy during the test, the
contribution of his aerobic energy supply system will, despite an equal
performance, be smaller than that of swimmer A. If in this case, lactate tests
are not available, the swimmer’s individual use of anaerobic energy cannot
be determined. The coach runs then the risk, when evaluating the results, of
overestimating the aerobic capacity and the “trainability” of swimmer B,
and of underestimating both with swimmer A.
The reliability of the 30-minute test also depends very much on the
swimmer’s motivation to perform maximally. Therefore it is important for
the coach to fit this test into the training process in such a way that the
swimmers can be motivated to do the best they can.

Other Tests
There are of course lots of other testing forms, mostly variations of the
above tests and with about the same pros and cons. Some are based on
lactate tests, others on heart rates, percentages of best times in competition
or percentages of swimming speeds during continuous exercises, etc. For
the interpretation and/or comments on these types of tests we refer to the
respective sections in this chapter.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide the tools for a critical approach of
the different types of testing and to stimulate the creation of a reliable
measuring system for intensity and volume.

Part II
PLANNING AND
PERIODIZATION OF TRAINING
Chapter 5
DEFINITIONS AND
DESCRIPTIONS
TRAINING PLANNING

A training plan is a table of contents which lists, for swimmers of every
performance level, all the elements needed to help them improve their
competitive performance. It usually covers more than one year but the time
allocated to the different elements is still quite rough.
The key elements recorded in a training plan are, in order of importance:
*
the main competitions (e.g. participation in school
competitions, in international events,...)
*
the main conditioning / mental / technical improvements to
be achieved
*
the expected evolution in performance (the key objectives
for each year, e.g. make top 3 at NJO’s in 2 years, break 1 minute in
100 m backstroke,...)
*
a general description of the swim and dry-land training (e.g.
other sports activities to complete the swim training, possibly altitude
training,...)

*
the number of training units (sessions) and the total mileage
per week (e.g. when to start with training twice a day,...)
*
the tests to support and control the effectiveness of the
training (e.g. video analysis, lactate tests,...)
*
non sport related commitments (sponsor or school
commitments,...)
As the evolution of the swimmer’s conditioning is not a hundred percent
predictable, training plans will be subject to modifications during the season
according to successive evaluations of the training, competition and test
results. External factors too, such as school commitments, health and
injuries, obligations to sponsors or federations, may force the coach to adapt
his “plans”.
Why planning?
*
*

To provide insight and overview about the training process
To boost the swimmer’s motivation
*
To control the timing of the changes in conditioning by means of
tests, competitions and evaluations of the training results
*
To achieve a long-term continuous improvement in competition
performance

A training plan should be set up early in the swimmer’s career. For
beginning competitive swimmers, establishing a training plan is fairly
simple as, for this group, training is mainly directed towards fundamentals
such as technique, flexibility and endurance, with only a limited amount of
different training types.
However, once the coach is dealing with elite swimmers the training plan
becomes much more complex not only because of the variety of types of
training which have to be framed in the right sequence, but also because of
the many sport and non sport related factors that have to be taken into
consideration (tab. 17).

For example, if the athlete is in college, he or she may have commitments
based on the academic schedule. In designing a training plan for elite
swimmers, the coach will also have to spend more time on the analysis of
the training completed in the previous years as well as on the evaluation of
technique and conditioning.

TRAINING PERIODIZATION
The first step in the training process is the training planning which consists
of gathering all the necessary ingredients (competitions, evaluation tests,
types of training, all kinds of other sport or non sport activities,...) to
improve competition performance. The second step, called the training
periodization, arranges, organizes, schedules and fixes the timing as well as
the duration of each type of training, testing, etc. for one year according to
the fixed objectives.

The peak form is a temporary but stable condition, which enables the
swimmer to realize a top performance in his specific discipline. Reaching
peak form is the culmination of 3 distinctive development periods:
the base training period which consist in building up the basic
conditioning components

the competition training period split in:
✽
a pre-competition training period or peak form inducing
training period. During this period all efforts are focused on the
fine-tuning and optimization of the acquired basic conditioning
components (e.g. aerobic and anaerobic capacities, mental
preparation, stress tolerance) in order to realize a top performance
✽
an in-between competition training period or peak form
maintaining training period. The main objective here is the
stabilization of the peak form
the transition period : a period of relative rest with a temporary
regression of conditioning after the peak form was reached
It is important for the coach to comply with these 3 main training periods as
well as with their sequence because:
many biological and psycho-physiological adaptations to the
training effort require a steady rhythmic pattern that involves:
1.
the increase in intensity of the activity
2.
the stabilization of the activity
3.
the reduction of the activity
the different types of training required to reach a peak
conditioning cannot all be completed at the same time. The
sequence of the dominant training types will therefore have to be
meticulously thought up to build up the competitive performance
systematically and methodically in order to bring the swimmer in
maximal peak form at the right moment
the training load the athlete can handle has limits which can only
be increased by an optimal relationship between intensity and rest
The sequence of the 3 training periods may repeat itself 2 or 3 times a year
depending on the number of top competitions.

By accurately scheduling the timing and duration of these 3 inseparable
training periods the coach designs the optimal preparation for the entire
season.

Chapter 6
PLANNING

BASICS OF TRAINING

TRAINING CONCEPT AND TRAINING OUTLINE
In many countries, the sports federation fixes the training concept which
contains general indications and instructions on training objectives,
performance evolution, qualification times, compulsory training camps,
high priority meetings, trials, etc.
The training outline is based on the training concept and provides the
general guidelines for structuring the training process for a well-defined
group (possibly one single swimmer) during 1 or more years. It is a rather
theoretical training model and depends on:
the sport (e.g. swimming, running, etc.)
the sports discipline (e.g. sprint, middle or long distance, etc.)
Once the general directives are set forth, the coach can start framing and
detailing the training plan. Here we will make a distinction between 2
different types of training plans (fig. 64):
1. the individual or group training plan which is focused on
respectively one swimmer or a specific group of swimmers
2. the training plan framed in a time perspective . We then speak of a
multi-year plan, year plan, macrocycle, mesocycle, microcycle
and a single training unit plan according to the period it covers

Fig. 64A training plan can be framed considering ☐ a specific target group
or ☐ a time perspective.

INDIVIDUAL OR GROUP TRAINING PLAN
When the training plan is designed for one single swimmer, we logically
speak of an individual training plan . In the case the training plan is drawn
up for a group of swimmers of a more or less homogeneous performance
level, we use the term group training plan .
In reality both training plans will be used interchangeably. Indeed, some
training goals such as regeneration can certainly be completed in group.
Other objectives on the contrary, such as frequency (stroke rate) training,
direct themselves to the specific needs of each particular swimmer and
require therefore a specific individual training plan.
The swimmer’s performance level also determines the choice between an
individual or group training plan. For young, even promising swimmers,
preference is given to a group plan as it is still easy to put swimmers with
similar performance levels together. This however does not mean that for
this group the task of the coach stops with posting the workouts on the wall

or writing them on the blackboard. In this case too the training plan will
have to be readjusted regularly according to the physiological development
of the athletes within the group. For a top level swimmer, on the other hand,
a personalized training approach is absolutely necessary making the
individual training plan indispensable.

TRAINING PLAN WITH A TIME PERSPECTIVE
The Multi-Year Plan
The first requirement for a continuous performance improvement over
several years is to establish at an early stage a multi-year plan delineating
the building-up of the conditioning over several years. This can be done for
individual swimmers as well as for a specific group and starts when basic
technique in the 4 strokes is mastered.
The multi-year plan consists of 3 phases, each covering several years and
characterized by specific objectives (see Age Group Training) guaranteeing
a progressive and durable long-term development:
*
*
*

Basic training
Build-up training
Top level training

Basic Training (start between 10 and 12 years of age, duration about 4
years) In the beginning of this training phase the emphasis lies on:
*
the general physical development, as broad as possible, of
the beginner and age group swimmer
*
stroke technique and coordination (starts/turns) which are
best learned and practised at young age
*
the development of the swimmer’s capacity of assimilating
the training load
*
non swim specific activities
*
learning the competition rules and how to use the training
material, etc.
*
the swimmer’s health status. A medical screening should be
conducted to detect and possibly remedy weaknesses that may
negatively affect further training or are liable to affect the swimmer’s
health when increasing the training load

In a later stage of the basic training phase:
*
more attention will be paid to the sport specific conditioning
development
*
the amount of training will be substantially increased,
mainly by raising the number of training sessions per week while
confining the duration of each training unit to 60 minutes
*
the right competitive attitude will progressively be
“cultivated”

Build-up Training (start between 14 and 16 years, duration at least 3
years) This phase of the multi-year plan:
*
runs to about 3 years before peak form age, which in disciplines,
where endurance and strength determine the competition performance,
presumably lies between 23 and 26 years. In swimming disciplines
with a high technical factor, however, peak form age is reached faster
which obviously shortens the build-up phase
*
emphasizes besides endurance and strength, also the mental
development such as the willingness to go all-out, the dealing with
setbacks or failures, the competitiveness, the concentration power, the
desire for training, etc.
* can easily take up 3 to 7 years
In this phase:
* the training load is further increased by lengthening the duration of
the training units. Only in a later stage and depending on the
conditioning level of the swimmer the number of training units per
week may again be raised (possibly even to several training units a
day)
*
more swim specific training and conditioning will be included.
Participation in other sport activities is still allowed but only if it
supports the swim specific physical development
* attention should be paid to the structure of the training process, i.e.
the training periodization
* attention should also be paid to perfecting stroke techniques which
the swimmer must be able to execute correctly in varying situations

Top Level Training (start between 17 and 19 years of age, duration at
least 4 years) As opposed to the build-up phase, where the training goals
were still general, broad and rough, the objectives of the top level training
are:
*
almost entirely determined by the specific needs of each
swimmer individually
*
the maximal development of all swim specific and
performance determining conditioning components (developing the
individual peak form). Nevertheless, the conditioning qualities that
only indirectly determine the competition performance need also to
reach an optimum level and be stabilized
*
the perfection of the technique, now focused on the
quality of execution in competition (frequency, amplitude, etc.) rather
than on the correctness of the moving pattern
*
the involvement of the swimmer in the planning and
training processes
It is thus in this phase essential to assess:
*
a profile of the swimmer’s weak and strong characteristics
*
the swimmer’s ability to react and adapt to the various training
exercises
This requires an ongoing observation of the evolution of the swimmer’s
conditioning level (based on training, competition and test results) and an
evaluation of the training actually completed. This should indicate
whether or not the swimmer has optimally adapted to the prescribed
training program.
Which training information should be stated in a multi-year plan?
*
long-term competition (e.g. in 2 years’ time top 3 over 200 m
butterfly at the National Championships) and “motivational” goals
(e.g. national selections or swim camps abroad)
* long-term technique (e.g. to be able to swim in competition 100 m
in all 4 strokes after one year of basic training) and conditioning
objectives (e.g. a 4 mmol/l lactate swim time faster than 5:00 over 400
m freestyle at 15 years of age). The competition goals are thus

complemented with training goals (types of training exercises,
intensity, volume) which become gradually more strenuous
*
dry-land training. Starting strength training without proper
progressive preparation greatly increases the risk for injuries; here also,
it is important to consider the swimmer’s biological adaptation
capacities as well as his individual trainability and regeneration
capacity
*
the number of training units per year which is in part
determined by school or professional activities
*
medical check-ups and other tests to evaluate the evolution of
the conditioning, technique, etc. These tests are meant to continually
adjust the training plan to the swimmer’s specific needs
Table 18 presents an example of a multi-year plan in swimming that only
provides information about the training amount. An exhaustive multi-year
plan should furthermore supply data related to training intensity,
competitions, technique and conditioning goals.

The Year Plan
In the year plan (tab. 19) the coach will detail the training process for just
one year. This plan:
is designed in accordance with the multi-year plan
can be framed for one single swimmer as well as for a group of
swimmers
considers the evolution of the swimmer’s conditioning level and
takes into account the experience/information collected from
previous training periods

What information has to be stated in the year plan?
the selection of competitions. The coach has to distinguish
between top meets (Junior Olympics, nationals, Olympic trials,
etc.) and test competitions (to evaluate the completed training
period) that do not require specific preparation such as shaving,
tapering, fine-tuning of training, etc.
the training and competition objectives
the training load, which is the most important element of the year
plan. The coach will indicate:
✽ the periods of intensive or voluminous training (e.g. training
camps during school breaks)
✽ the periods of relative rest. At this stage the coach has to build
in a wave pattern in the year plan (= alternating process of training
load and regeneration)
✽ the dominant types of training exercises for a certain period of
time (mostly per mesocycle)
✽ the periods of technique practice
✽ the number of weekly training units
the medical check-ups and other evaluation tests of the
conditioning, technique, etc. (lactate tests, strength tests, etc.)
the training evaluations
By involving the swimmer in designing the year plan, his commitment to
the training work will increase.

The Macrocycle
Each peak form (i.e. temporary and stable condition allowing top
performances in one or more competition(s)) is prepared in 2 distinctive

periods:
*
the base training period
*
competition training period (pre- and in-between competition
training period)
and is followed by:
*

the transition period , which is a period of relaxation

These 3 training periods constitute what is called the macrocycle.
Depending on the swimmer’s conditioning profile and the competition
calendar the coach will structure the macrocycle differently by varying:
*

the number and duration of the training units per week
*
the total training volume per week
*
the volume and frequency per week of the different types of
training exercises (water training as well as dry-land training)
During the whole macrocycle the evolution of the conditioning will be
regularly controlled by different tests which will dictate adjustments to the
training plan. It is therefore very important to choose carefully the
appropriate timing for these tests when drawing up the macrocycle.
So, when periodizing, the coach splits the year plan into as many
macrocycles as there are periods of top competitions. In the case where 2 or
3 top meetings are spread out over a year, the year plan will be divided into
respectively 2 and 3 macrocycles. It may, however, happen that there are
only 2 or 3 weeks between 2 of these top meets. In this case the coach will
plan only one macrocycle to prepare for both of these 2 important top
competitions.
In practice, as the objectives and the content of each macrocycle strongly
depend on the swimmer’s (or group’s) current conditioning level and needs,
the coach will only develop one macrocycle at a time. Until the coach has
evaluated the training and the competition results of the previous
macrocycle, he has no idea of how to improve or adjust the structure of the
next macro. So, the specifics of the macrocycles to come cannot be
finalized and remain only roughly described in the year plan.

The Mesocycle

Since it is not possible to train all the conditioning features necessary to
deliver a top performance at the same time, the macrocycle has to be split
into various smaller training periods. Each of these periods, called
mesocycle, normally lasts 3 to 6 weeks and is designed to improve specific
aspects of the athlete’s conditioning.
Each mesocycle consists of:
*
a working or high load phase; a period of voluminous and/or
intensive work, whereby training volume and/or training intensity are
gradually increased. This does not mean that the coach will
progressively increase the intensity and/or volume of every
consecutive training unit. He will instead increase the intensity and/or
volume of the main training workouts or add an extra quality set
(workout at an intensity higher than regeneration). Thus, the swimmer
still goes through a lot of regeneration training but these low intensity
exercises will either compensate for more intense and voluminous
main workouts or be more often alternated with intensive work
*
a regeneration phase or period of relative rest before starting
the next mesocycle. The last regeneration phase of the mesocycle prior
to the top competition is also called the taper phase and is meant to
make the swimmer “100% competition ready” physiologically,
technically as well as mentally, i.e. fully recovered (especially with
respect to the neuromuscular processes) and eager to compete
The content as well as the “load structure” of each mesocycle depends on
its training objectives and on the results of the conditioning tests.
Take for example a 5-week mesocycle at the beginning of a macrocycle. As
the objective is the building-up of various conditioning components, the
working phase will consist predominantly of aerobic capacity training
occasionally spiced with anaerobic capacity sets. Training volume and
intensity will be progressively increased during the first 3 weeks of the
mesocycle (fig. 65). During the second part of the mesocycle (week 4 and
5, the recovery or regeneration phase) the training load will be reduced by
decreasing volume as well as intensity, such as only 1 or 2 intensive
workouts which will be shorter than during the working phase.
A 5-week mesocycle in the ultimate stage of the competition training
period, just prior to the top meeting, will have training objectives that are

quite different. Indeed, instead of building up the various conditioning
components the coach will now focus on the fine-tuning. The sprinter will
need maximal improvement of the anaerobic power, while the distance
swimmer will accent the maximal development of aerobic power. As for
both swimmers the training intensity is already high, it is no longer possible
to increase simultaneously volume and intensity without any risk. So,
during the working (high load) phase aiming at the specific improvement of
respectively the anaerobic and aerobic power, the swimmers, and the
sprinters in particular, will have to compensate for the high intensity by
decreasing the training volume (fig. 66). Certain distance swimmers, with a
very low anaerobic capacity, however, may be able to increase their aerobic
power while increasing volume in the last part of the working phase. In this
case, the coach should see to give these swimmers enough room for
regeneration before starting this last mesocycle.

Fig. 65 Content and “load structure” of a 5-week mesocycle during the base
training period (at the beginning of the macrocycle) aiming at the
improvement of various conditioning components. AEC and ANC =
aerobic and anaerobic capacity, ps = personal best stroke, TU/week =
training units per week.

Fig. 66 Content and “load structure” of a 5-week mesocycle at the ultimate
stage of the competition training period aiming at the maximal
improvement of the sprinter’s anaerobic power. AEC and ANC = aerobic
and anaerobic capacity, ANP = anaerobic power, ps = personal best stroke,
TU/week = training units per week.
Beside the 5-week mesocycle, there are, of course, various other mesocycle
structures, such as the 2, 3, 4, 6, or even 7-week mesocycles. All of them,
however, contain a working (high load) phase followed by a period of
relative rest.
Figure 67 shows a special type of mesocycle, a 6-week mesocycle (fig. 67).
According to the type of swimmer, his specialty and his needs, the first 2
weeks are spent on the improvement of the aerobic and/or anaerobic
capacity and week 4 and 5 on training the aerobic or anaerobic power. Both
high load phases are followed by a regeneration week (week 3 and 6). In the
last week of the mesocycle (week of relative rest) some extra speed training
is inserted.

Fig. 67 Content and training load of a 6-week mesocycle for a top level
swimmer including all types of training exercises (water as well as dry-land
training). AEC and ANC = aerobic and anaerobic capacity, ANP =
anaerobic power, ps = personal best stroke, TU/week = training units per
week, MFST = maximal force, ENST = endurance force strength training,
EXST = explosive force strength training, min = only a short and light
strength training unit.
What is remarkable for this mesocycle is not so much the fact that it lasts 6
weeks, but rather that all types of water (aerobic and anaerobic capacities
and power) and dry-land training (maximal force (MFST), endurance force
strength training (ENST), explosive force strength training (EXST)) are
programmed.
The wide variety of training stimuli to which the organism is exposed in a
short time span makes this “load structure” quite aggressive and only
suitable for top level swimmers. Indeed, the swimmer needs to be strong
enough (to have enough force) and to have a sufficiently high competitive
performance level to be able to “digest” this type of mesocycle. Moreover,
not every top swimmer has a capacity for super-compensation that comes
about “fast” enough to handle this training rhythm. So, it is clear that the

“happy few” who can support and assimilate this type of training structure,
head for a promising swimming career.
This 6-week mesocycle which is strongly directed to power training, is not
suitable for young swimmers who primarily require capacity training to
gradually build up their conditioning so they can make continuous progress
in competition.
We recommend not using this “aggressive” mesocycle structure until the
last stage of the multi-year plan. In anticipation of this forceful training
method, we advise coaches to apply the smoother classic 3 to 5-week
mesocycle, which carries less risks of overtraining and enables the
swimmer to build up his career step by step with more room for a positive
training response (see Paradoxical Training Effects).
Contrary to the rather provisionally determined training objectives in the
macrocycle, the goals of the mesocycle are tuned to the swimmer’s current
conditioning level, “trainability” and specific needs as revealed by the
regularly performed conditioning tests. This individual approach is essential
as not every swimmer reacts or responds in the same way to the same
training stimulus. Experience has taught us, for example, that some
swimmers only have to “look at” anaerobic capacity training to induce
anaerobic capacity adaptations; others on the other hand, have to train a lot
more only to reach the same anaerobic capacity level. Moreover, the
purpose of the planned training exercises has to be considered, thought over
and adjusted if necessary according to the results of each evaluation test.
The final and optimal structure of the mesocycle is thus determined by:
*
*

the evolution of the swimmer’s weak and strong characteristics
the swimmer’s current “trainability” and “adaptability”

The Microcycle (Week Plan)
The microcycle provides a detailed training program for a period lasting
from a few days to one week, in which case it is also called week plan (fig.
68).
The content as well as the “load structure” of the microcycle depends on the
training objectives of the mesocycle in which it takes place. The training
intensity and volume need to be scheduled and balanced appropriately for
the super-compensation to take place even in periods of 2 or more daily
training units.
The super-compensation remains the key process of the training and gets
enhanced by regeneration training. If the swimmer is given too little
regeneration training or relative rest, his organism will never get the chance
to reach super-compensation which will in time inevitably lead to
overtraining.
Moreover, the dominant training workouts too, need to be carefully and
appropriately scheduled in the microcycle. Here are some tips that may help
to guarantee the right timing of the important workouts in the week plan:
*
Sets or drills requiring a fine and precise locomotion, such as
sprints and learning or improving technique, must be performed in a
relative fresh and fit condition. Therefore, make sure not to plan this

type of exercise at the end of a training unit, after a hard or demanding
set or training unit
*
It is advisable to avoid explosive strength training (EXST) and
other “explosive” training exercises in a tired or fatigued condition,
although opinions differ greatly about this
*
Substantial anaerobic lactic workouts (capacity or power) should
be restricted to 1, 2 or maximally 3 training sessions a week depending
on the swimmer’s anaerobic capacity. They should always be
alternated with low intensity training units during the base training
period. In the competition training period, however, it may be useful to
plan anaerobic lactic sets on 2 or 3 consecutive days for the swimmer
to get used to the succession of races in a meeting over several days
such as Trials, Junior/Senior Nationals, European or World
championships, Olympic Games, ...
*
Regeneration training is the most important training in the
competition training period. In periods of more than one day of
competition a week, the microcycle (week plan) will almost
exclusively consist of regeneration training
In the transition period, following the competition training period, it is not
necessary, even useless to design a strict microcycle. In this period, the
swimmer should be allowed to physically and psychologically unwind and
to exercise “à la carte”

Fig. 68 Example of a microcycle, also called week plan, for fly and
freestyle swimmers (top) and for breaststroke swimmers (below).
Backstroke swimmers will join either group depending on their need of
frequency training. TU = training units, REG = regeneration training, AEC
and ANC = respectively aerobic and anaerobic capacity, AEP = aerobic
power, F = frequency training, MFST and ENST = respectively maximal
force and endurance force strength training, FrS = free sport.

The Training Unit
The different types of training plans described up to this point only provide
coach and swimmer with broad guidelines on the training objectives for
achieving the peak form in a gradual and structured way.
A training unit plan, on the contrary, contains all the specific details for
executing each training session. As each training unit represents a link in
the chain leading to a top performance, the content of this training plan can
never be framed apart from the more general planning described above.
An effective training unit (session) generally consists of the following parts
completed in the suggested order:

1.

The warm-up

Following the warm-up there are 1 or 2 main parts made up to meet the
objectives of the mesocycle:
2.

The first main part
This part includes exercises of a high technical and coordination level
requiring a well rested athlete and meant to induce conditioning
adaptations and/or to improve the technical abilities (e.g. frequency
(stroke rate) training, anaerobic capacity training, sprint training or
technique training, ...)
3.
A short regeneration exercise
The higher the intensity of the first main part, the more indispensable the
regeneration exercise becomes
4.
The second main part
This part includes swimming that induces conditioning adaptations but
does not require high technical or coordination skills, such as long
endurance repeats
5.
The cool-down
This part of the training is very important since it starts the recovery and
regeneration phase that will lead to the super-compensation. An active
start of the regeneration not only speeds up the recovery process but also
the time for super-compensation
If one training unit contains 2 main parts, the sequence of the exercises is
determined by the following guidelines:
Sets or drills that are principally technical and/or coordination
directed (e.g. sprint, frequency (stroke rate) training, etc.) precede
workouts intended to improve the conditioning
Speed exercises are completed before endurance exercises or
strength training
The working muscle groups should be alternated (especially
during strength training)

The usefulness of alternating the working muscle groups depends on the
training goal. After an intensive training set, for example, alternating
muscle groups is opportune because it relaxes the swimmer but it does not
speed up the local regeneration of the muscles (physiological recovery).
Indeed, experimental research has shown that the local regeneration of the
stressed muscle is fastest if the muscle experiences the same type of
movement as during the hard exertion but with a low intensity. Therefore,
after an intensive workout, the coach will have to compromise between the
swimmer’s physiological regeneration (i.e. continuing the same type of
exercise but at a low intensity) and his mental/psychological relaxation (i.e.
alternating the working muscle groups by planning another type of
workout).
Alternating the working muscle groups is also beneficial prior to a period of
voluminous training in the main stroke. It is therefore advisable to have the
breast- or backstroke swimmers carry out a few intervals of an endurance
set in their main stroke in the weeks preceding the long and tiring sets in
breast- or backstroke.

During aerobic endurance training, on the other hand, it is best to reduce the
alternating of the working muscle groups to a minimum as the specific
nature of an aerobic endurance exercise is only guaranteed if the same
muscle groups are stressed for a long period. This principle is especially
important when scheduling endurance training for individual medley
swimmers. Indeed, the coach should preferably have these swimmers
complete large blocks in one of the 4 strokes in the base training period. For
example, scheduling a 12 x 200 m set with the first 6 repeats in backstroke
and the remaining 6 in freestyle is in this period better than giving a 12 x
200 m medley set. During the competition training period, however, each
interval of the 12 x 200 m medley set should actually be performed in
medley.
At the end of the training session it may sometimes be useful to have an
evaluation together with the swimmer and to check:

*
*
*

how he felt during the training unit
what went good, not so good or just plain bad
if the technical work was OK, etc.

This feedback is very important for possible and timely modifications of the
week plan.

Summary
The following figure and table (fig. 69 and tab. 20) give an overview of the
different types of training plans based on the length of time each covers.
According to its time span, the content of each training plan will go from
important strategies, general objectives and broad guidelines about the
training process (long-term plan) to detailed schemes and directives
adjusted to the swimmer’s individual and current needs (short-term plan).

Fig. 69 Survey of the different types of training plans.

Chapter 7
BASICS OF TRAINING
PERIODIZATION
Contrary to the training planning, which consists of setting general training
guidelines for one or more years, the training periodization refers to the
break down of the training year into different training periods with the main
objective of getting the swimmer to peak at the right time.
Until recently, the periodization of the swim season was quite easy as the
coach had only to consider 1 peak per year. The broader range of
competitions available now and the evolution of swimming towards a more
professional sport have resulted in swimmers having to peak more than
once a year. Depending on whether the swimmer wants to peak once, twice,
or even more times per year, the coach will have to consider a 1-, 2- or
multi-peak periodization.
Age group swimmers generally work towards a maximum of 2 peaks per
year. More yearly peaks will take away from the time that should be spent
on the build-up of conditioning, which, in young swimmers, remains the
most important objective to improve competitive performance at a later age.
Elite athletes can risk 4 different peaks a year, but this clearly will be at the
expense of the stability of their conditioning. Plans for a 4-peak
periodization should therefore be considered carefully and selectively.
The periodization of the training year starts by fixing the top competitions.
The weeks preceding these major events are subsequently organized in 2
periods:
1. the base training period which lays the foundation for a top
performance
2. the competition training period starting with the specific race
preparation and ending with the actual event in which the
swimmer wants a top performance
After the last competition, there is a wind-down period, which is called the
transition period . During this time the athlete can relax physically as well
as mentally (and so regenerate).

Each preparation for a top performance during the year must contain these 3
periods (see chapter 5, Definitions and Descriptions) with a specific load
and training structure.

THE BASE TRAINING PERIOD
This period consists of 1 or more mesocycles, during which the athlete
improves his conditioning, technique, etc. It has a two-fold objective:
1. to lay the foundation for reaching a top performance. From a
conditioning point of view this is capacity training (aerobic and
anaerobic capacity and maximal force)
2. to increase the athlete’s capacity for assimilating the training load
The second goal is very important for a long-term (over several years)
continuous improvement of the competitive performance. Indeed, the better
the athlete’s competitive performance, the more (volume as well as
intensity) he will have to train to further improve it (see Declining Return
on Training Investment). It is thus necessary to prepare the swimmer
progressively and on time for future increases in training work. Some time
must also be spent on training exercises that may not bring any short-term
competition performance improvement but which will pay off in
improvements later in the swimmer’s career. Power training sets in water as
well as on land, for example, lead quickly to top performances by young
swimmers, but very often hinder improvement in competitive performance
at a later age. Capacity training, however, will lead to slower improvements
in competitive performance for young swimmers, but guarantees a better
assimilation of any increase in training load at a later age, with the
improvement in competitive performances at that stage.
The ideal preparation during the base training period covers 3 mesocycles:
Mesocycle I:
conditioning

Development and completion of the general

The objective of this first mesocycle is to approach as close as
possible the previous year’s (at the same period) performance
level

The training sessions are non-specific and usually of low to
moderate intensity. This period is, thus, ideal for practising other
sports to build up the best possible general conditioning
Use this mesocycle for improving technique (acquiring, correcting
and automating)
Since at this stage it is not yet necessary for training work in the
water to be very specific and/or intensive, this is a good time to
start (intensive) strength training. The strength training exercises
do not have to be swim (movement) specific but should, for the
most part address the muscle groups that are important to
swimming such as triceps, latissimus dorsi, quadriceps for
breaststroke swimmers, lower arm flexors, lower arm extensors
and arm rotators. If the swimmer has already done strength
training during the previous year, he/she proceeds to training for
maximum force after a short acclimatization period. Depending on
the individual need for maximum force this can be alternated with
endurance strength in the form of circuit training
Mesocycle II:

Development of the specific basic abilities

In this mesocycle the swimmer works on improving the specific
basic abilities required for his best discipline (stroke and distance)
Training remains mainly directed towards building the aerobic
capacity but, as opposed to the first mesocycle, the training
program will now become much more detailed and specific.
Backstroke, good butterfly and some breaststroke swimmers will
start to do a lot of work in their main stroke. The intensity remains
relatively low (endurance training; moderate to low intensity) but
the training load becomes gradually more difficult by increasing
volume
The large volume completed during this mesocycle may
somewhat repress the swimmers’ anaerobic as well as sprint
capacity. It is therefore advisable to insert a short anaerobic
capacity training once or twice a week and to complete some
sprints every 2 or 3 training units
The level of complexity of the technique drills will be raised

It is essential to emphasize technique training to minimize the loss
in technique often caused by high volume training in the
swimmer’s best stroke
Out of the water the swimmer will continue with intensive
training, i.e. maximal force or a combination of maximal force
and endurance strength
Mesocycle III:

Development of competition specific abilities

The third mesocycle is meant to maintain and stabilize the
acquired basic conditioning components and to gradually prepare
the swimmer for the specific competition training period that
coincides with upcoming meets. At this point the swimmer starts
with frequency (stroke rate) training and drills to automate
technique at competition speed
Endurance training decreases slightly and the freed up time is
used for more intensive work. For 50 - 400 m swimmers the
emphasis lays on anaerobic capacity training (2 to 4 times per
week). The distance swimmers, on the other hand, will now
complete less anaerobic capacity work but more aerobic power
workouts. During this mesocycle the intensity is thus significantly
higher for all the swimmers
There will be 1 to 2 weeks of relative rest from dry-land training
in order to compensate for the intensive work in the water. After
this short but important period, sprinters increase explosive
strength training and long distance swimmers switch to endurance
strength training
The ideal base training period covers about 15 weeks, which in practice is
not always feasible. Therefore, the coach will often have to reach a
compromise, usually by adapting the number of cycles or their duration or
by merging mesocycle I and II into 1 cycle.

THE COMPETITION TRAINING PERIOD
During this period 1 or 2 cycles are planned in order to fine tune and
balance the improved conditioning components.

Experience with elite athletes has taught us that building up the
conditioning usually presents no problems and can even be done very
quickly. However, how long this improvement will last and how stable it
will be, is proportional to the duration of the base training period. It is
indeed possible to make spectacular progress in conditioning in 3 to 4
weeks but such an improvement will deteriorate very quickly. This short
build-up will thus be sufficient to register a top performance during one
competition, but not to repeat several top performances, even within one
weekend.
Once a stable conditioning base has been established, it is essential to fine
tune and balance the improved conditioning components. A “super basic
endurance” (aerobic capacity), a “tremendous basic speed” and a “fabulous
anaerobic capacity” are of no avail if the 2 basic capacities are not in
optimal proportion. Moreover, to guarantee a top competition performance,
the “super aerobic capacity” of the distance swimmer and the “super
anaerobic capacity” of the sprinter must be accompanied by respectively a
strong aerobic and anaerobic power.
The complexity of the competition training period is largely dependent on
both the number of competitions and their distribution over this period. If
the swimmer is preparing for only one race (or one meet), we speak about a
“simple competition training period” . The entire competition training
period will then be used to fine tune and balance the conditioning
components specifically needed for the race the swimmer is preparing for.
In this case the competition training period will only consist of the precompetition or peak form inducing training period. The taper phase is
included in this period.
The term “complex competition training period” is used when 2 or more
consecutive events or meets (e.g. consecutive World Cups or Conference
championships followed by NCAA championships) are scheduled. The
competition training period will then not only consist of a peak form
inducing but also of a peak form maintaining period (= in-between
competition training period) as the swimmer’s optimal conditioning profile
needs to be maintained to have him perform at top level in several
consecutive events.

The number of mesocycles during the competition training period as well as
their duration is determined by the complexity of the competition training
period (simple or complex competition training period) and by the
swimmer’s specific needs. For example, swimmers with both a weak
aerobic and anaerobic capacity, having completed a short base training
period (4 to 8 weeks) and preparing for a single top competition may need
only 1 mesocycle consisting of a 10 days intensive working phase and a 6
days taper phase (= regeneration phase of the last mesocycle prior to the top
competition). On the other hand, swimmers with strong capacities and more
consecutive events to prepare for (complex competition training period),
will have to go through a much longer base training period and will need
more time to induce peak form.
During the pre-competition training period, long distance swimmers will
benefit from a long working (3 to 6 weeks) and a short taper phase (4 to 14
days) while sprinters will be better off with a short working (1 to 5 weeks)
and a long taper phase (2 to 4 weeks).
Top level long distance swimmers can only achieve optimal aerobic power
after 4 to 6 weeks of specific training. However, a mesocycle of 4 to 6
consecutive weeks that is focused on improving aerobic power presents a
great risk for overtraining. It is, therefore, advisable for these swimmers to
plan 2 mesocycles during the peak inducing period (pre-competition
training period). The use of 2 mesocycles will also enhance the success of a
short taper phase. Indeed, if the swimmer is too tired after a long working
phase of aerobic power training, he will never get “100% competition
ready” in only one week of taper. A required prolongation of the taper
phase would on the other hand improve his anaerobic capacity and
consequently deteriorate his aerobic power, which would considerably
impede his competition performance on long distance events.
Likewise, top level sprinters, with both a high aerobic and anaerobic
capacity, can only build up an optimal anaerobic power through 3 to 5
weeks of specific intensive anaerobic power workouts. Experience,
however, has taught us that if the swimmer maintains this anaerobic power
training for more than 3 weeks, basic endurance will inevitably deteriorate.
It is thus advisable for these swimmers to either:

plan a pre-competition training period of only one but long
mesocycle (7 to 8 weeks). This mesocycle should consist of a
working phase focused on anaerobic power training that is split
into 2 periods of about 2 weeks each and separated by 3 to 5 days
of extensive (low intensity) aerobic capacity training. This short
period of aerobic capacity training will be preceded and followed
by 1 to 2 days of regeneration. This scheme mostly allows a taper
phase of only 2 weeks, or to
plan 3 short mesocycles in the pre-competition training period;
mesocycles 1 and 3 focusing on anaerobic power training and
mesocycle 2, of maximally 10 days, meant to “refresh” the
aerobic capacity. This scheme will permit swimmers to participate
in a test competition or even in trials after the first mesocycle
During a complex competition training period, the time span between the
competitions determines the choice of the different types of training. If the
period between consecutive meets is more than 9 days, a small microcycle
of at most 3 training days can be used to refresh the aerobic and anaerobic
capacity (not power!!!). Before starting this microcycle it is also useful to
plan 1 or 2 days of regeneration training. If 9 days or less are available
between the competitions it is advisable to free up as much time as possible
for regeneration training complemented with possibly 1 aerobic capacity
training.
Research has shown that the duration of peak conditioning depends on the
total duration of the peak form inducing period. Our experience, however,
has taught us that 3 weeks is about the maximum period during which an
athlete can be kept in peak form. As it is thus quite exceptional to be able to
maintain a peak conditioning during 4 consecutive weekends, we, in this
case, advise the swimmer only to compete in 3 of the 4 competitions.
The training content completed during both the peak form inducing and
maintaining periods is very specific and needs to be designed individually.
Only the short in-between cycle may be non-specific.
The training intensity during the peak form inducing period is very high and
the rest in the main sets short. Competitions are an excellent means to build
up the anaerobic power as the motivation to excel at these competitions is
often greater than in training sessions. Moreover, this is also a good

opportunity to get back into the competition mood and ambiance after a
long preparation period. To compensate for the high intensity, the training
volume must be kept low (fig. 66) and the easy work should be clearly
extensive (low intensity). There will, thus, be a large contrast in intensities
during this training period.
During the peak form maintaining period the coach’s objective is to get and
keep the swimmer fit, fresh, vigorous and full of power at the start of each
competition. Training may still include a short intensive or a single high
volume workout, but the time necessary for the super-compensation to take
place should be unconditionally guaranteed and respected. During this
period the intensity may thus still be high for a brief time, but the volume of
these intensive workouts should be definitely low. The volume can also be
increased but only for one day and it will have to be extensive (low
intensity) and as quickly as possible compensated by sufficient regeneration
work. Each intensity or volume training session must show its effects within
a short-term (2 to 3 days).
Strength training continues up to about 2 weeks before the important
competition in the form of endurance strength training for 200 to 1500 m
swimmers and explosive strength training for 50 to 200 m swimmers.
Thereafter strength training can be stopped, although some swimmers will
still like to “feel or lift weights”. The coach can then easily plan a “mini
strength training session”, but here again: it is essential for the swimmer to
be able to regenerate and have 100% of his capability available at the time
of the competition.

THE TRANSITION PERIOD
Not only building up to a peak conditioning (peak form) but also
performing in top competitions requires a large expenditure of energy from
the organism. Too often both the physical and psychological fatigue
accumulate during training and competition. It is, therefore, absolutely
necessary, especially for the senior swimmers, to recharge their “batteries”
before starting a new season, a new preparation process. This mesocycle,
also called the “active recovery mesocycle”, usually lasts 2 to 4 weeks and
sharply decreases the risk of overtraining in a systematic way. It is
characterized by:

the absence of competitions and intensive training
very little stroke specific work
all kinds of other non swim specific sport activities
other recovery promoting activities such as sauna, massage,
hydrotherapy etc.

SUMMARY
During the entire training periodization process the coach should always
consider:
the swimmer’s performance level
the swimmer’s constantly evolving and changing level of
conditioning, technique and mental qualities
The training plan will thus be continuously liable to modifications,
adaptations and adjustments according to changes in the swimmer’s
conditioning levels which will be evaluated at set times and from different
sides.
Moreover, the training process is multi-disciplinary. Swimming well in
competition is more than the result of a good conditioning. Indeed,
swimmers must also be at “top level” mentally and technically, otherwise
they will perform below par despite a super level of conditioning. Very
often coaches and advisers need to display great creativity and “dexterity”
to reach an optimal consensus between the swimmer’s physical, technical
and mental preparation. The choice of a particular or specific type of
workout does not always have to be scientifically motivated. Indeed the
coach’s personal practice, his individualized approach, his experience with
his swimmer(s) may sometimes be more decisive for the composition of the
training and the selection of the training exercises.

EXAMPLES
The following examples illustrate 2 different periodization plans, one with a
simple competition training period for a middle distance swimmer (fig. 70)
and another with a complex competition training period for a sprinter (fig.
71).

Fig. 70 Example of a periodization with a simple competition period for a
middle distance swimmer (400 m freestyle and 400 m medley; PS =
personal best stroke, AEC and ANC = aerobic and anaerobic capacity, AEP
and ANP = aerobic and anaerobic power, EN and EX = endurance and
explosive strength training, MF = maximal force). Top competition =
National Championships (Nat), Bl-ana = Blood Analysis.

Fig. 71 Example of a periodization with a complex competition
period for a sprinter (PS = personal best stroke, AEC and ANC =
aerobic and anaerobic capacity, AEP and ANP = aerobic and
anaerobic power, EN and EX = endurance and explosive strength
training, mF = pseudo maximal force). Top competitions = Age
Group National Championships (YC) and Youth European
Championships (YEC). Bl-ana = Blood Analysis, TE-ana =
Technique Analysis.

Chapter 8
METHODOLOGY
FOR TRAINING PLANNING
Several elements, such as types of workouts, their frequency and volume,
etc. are constantly recurring in the different types of training plans. These
recurring elements ensure that the different types of plans are geared to and
blended into one another to form a complex and rigorous unit of structured
and detailed proceedings designed to improve the performance level.
In fact, a training plan is never finished. As the training process constantly
needs to be adapted to the changes it induces, it is necessary to first
objectively record and measure the adaptations due to the training work
completed. This will enable the coach to make appropriate and evidence
based changes in the training process. Although the training adaptations can
somewhat be predicted from the composition of the training program, it is
best to have objectively measured training results as the “human reaction”
to a training process may sometimes be unforeseen. Only when the coach
knows the real effect of a training program, the effectiveness of the training
process can be guaranteed.
There is thus a constant and continuous interaction between the planning
process and its execution. This interaction results in an uninterrupted loop
of “planning”, “executing”, “measuring the training effects”, going back to
the training plan and verifying whether it has to be “adjusted” for the next
mesocycles. Every loop provides feedback information, which is used to
plan the next cycle in order to fit in the training process with the individual
trainability and so improve the training efficiency and “return”. This
process is called “training steering” and will be dealt with in details later on
in this part (see The Steering Principle).
In this chapter, the focus will be on the methodology for setting up training
plans (fig. 72). The whole process of making training plans goes through
various steps that can mainly be bundled in 2 distinctive phases:
the design phase
the realization phase (execution and steering)

Fig. 72 The process of making training plans goes through various steps
that can mainly be bundled in 2 distinctive phases: the design and
realization phases.

THE DESIGN PHASE

Before training starts in a new swim season, the coach makes an overall
schedule that will serve as a framework for the training process. This
framework is thus a broad draft of the real training program and will need
to be detailed and adapted as time goes by. The following 4 steps will guide
the coach when designing his training framework:

Step 1:
Analysis of the Swimmer’s Current
Performance Level and Training Background
Before periodizing the first macrocycle (the time between the top
competitions), i.e. fixing the base training, the competition training and the
transition periods, the coach must evaluate:
which qualities must be trained most urgently to improve the
swimmer’s competitive performance
how these qualities can best be improved during the different
training periods, considering the swimmer’s individual trainability
as determined by the evaluation of the training effects from
previous training periods
This evaluation process ensures that no time is lost to superfluous or
unnecessary types of training and that each training exercise contributes
purposefully and as efficiently as possible to the improvement of the
swimmer’s performance capacity. This evaluation process is based on:
1. The analysis of the training background (see chapter 8, The
Realization Phase) which should provide answers to the following
questions:
which competition and training goals were reached and which
were not?
what went wrong during the past training year (injuries,
illness, personal and/or academic problems etc.) and why?
did external factors disturb the training process (closing of
swimming pool, exam period, other personal commitments)?
did the previous training work yield enough performance
improvement or should another approach be tried?

2. The analysis of the current performance level which will provide
answers to questions such as how strong is the swimmer’s current
conditioning level and how strong are his present technical,
mental and tactical qualities? It will thus enable the coach to:
assess the swimmer’s strengths and weaknesses
set priorities to different types of training

Step 2: Set up of (Intermediary) Performance Objectives
Once the coach has fixed the priorities and the types of training to get the
desired improvements in conditioning, technique and/or mental qualities, he
will set up specific performance objectives for the upcoming season. These
objectives are distributed over the training year and must be realistic and
objectively verifiable by both the coach and the swimmer. Such
performance objective may be, for example, 50 m freestyle time under 26
seconds at the winter championships, or sub-minute on 100 m butterfly
while correctly performing side breathing.

Steps 3 and 4:
Determination and Design
of the Training Structure
Once the strengths and weaknesses of the swimmer are determined and the
priorities of the various types of training set, the coach will have to design
the appropriate training structure. This process is liable to some rules and
principles. Before describing the practical proceedings of planning (see
Procedure of Periodization), we will discuss the main principles of
structuring the training process.

Main Principles for Structuring the Training Process

These
rules and principles not only complement but also influence each other.
They should thus never be considered nor incorporated into the training
plan independently.
The 5 most important principles for structuring the training process are:
1. the optimal relation between work and regeneration (supercompensation)
2. the progressive build-up of the training load

3. the variation in training loads
4. the optimal timing and dosing of the swim specific and non swim
specific types of training and the development of the different
performance determining components
5. the durability of the development (= long-term build-up)
Each of these principles should be considered to some extent when
designing the different types of training plans. The number of arrows in
figure 73 represents the impact of these 5 principles on the year plan, the
microcycle and the unit plan.

Fig. 73 The 5 main principles for structuring the training process and
their influence on the different types of training plans. The number
of arrows indicates their degree of importance.
Another training principle, the principle of maturity (i.e. influence of age,
gender and biological maturity on trainability; see Age Group Training) has
not been considered here as it does not relate to the structuring of the

training plan but rather to the choice of the different types of training
exercises in a later stage of the periodization.
Principle of Optimal Relation between Work and Regeneration (SuperCompensation)
The optimal relation between work and regeneration is the basic
requirement for achieving a maximal super-compensation (see SuperCompensation). Depending on the type of training exercise, the timing to
reach the super-compensation will vary from a few hours to several days. It
is therefore very important for the coach, when designing a plan, not to
consider every workout independently but to take account of:
the training exercises recently completed
the training workouts planned for the next days
The swimmer’s conditioning should continuously improve during the
several months devoted to the training process. It is therefore important to
alternate high intensity and/or high volume training with extensive training
so that consecutive cycles of super-compensation can take place during the
entire swimming season. This will ensure a progressive build-up of the
performance capacity (fig. 74: Model A).
If intensive or high volume training sessions follow each other too quickly
or if the swimmer carries on with hard training in a state of overfatigue
and/or when struggling with health problems, super-compensation will not
get a chance to take place. His conditioning will progressively deteriorate
instead of growing (fig. 74: Model B).
To estimate the duration of the relative rest period needed for supercompensation, use the data from figure 2 whereby you can either:
1. wait after each intensive or high volume training session until
maximal super-compensation has been reached before starting the
next long or intensive unit (fig. 74: Model A). In-between the
swimmer can do easy training, or
2. neglect the timing for super-compensation and carry on with the
heavy training for a short period (maximally 1.5 week for elite
swimmers). After this period, during which fatigue has
accumulated, it is important to insert a recovery phase (active rest)

to obtain a super-compensation effect (fig. 74: Model C) and to
prevent conditioning from deteriorating (fig. 74: Model B)

Fig. 74 The build-up of conditioning can either be achieved by A) waiting
until maximal super-compensation has taken place before starting the next
training session or by C) inducing a super-compensation after accumulated
fatigue brought about by short consecutive hard and/or high volume
training units. B) uninterrupted intense or voluminous training, without
giving the organism a chance to reach super-compensation, should
definitely be avoided.
We recommend that beginning competitive and age group swimmers follow
the first option (Model A). These swimmers usually do not need much
training (3 to 4 training units a week) to make progress which leaves them
with enough room to wait for super-compensation after each training unit.
Elite swimmers, on the other hand, need increasingly more training to make
further progress (principle of declining return on training investment). As a
result of the amount of training units they have to go through, there will
certainly not always be enough time for a complete super-compensation
after every training. With these swimmers the coach will, therefore, not
always respect the timing for super-compensation but will insert instead a

recovery phase only after a series of hard or voluminous training sessions
(see fig. 74: Model C).
To sustain Model C without too much risk for overtraining, the swimmer
needs thus quite a high level of conditioning. This training model should
therefore definitely be avoided with beginning competition swimmers.
On the other hand, Model C provides the advantage to condition the body to
absorb a series of short but consecutive exertions, which is very useful in
preparation for a competition over several days.

Additionally the coach can also enhance the regeneration process after
certain types of training simply by including some regeneration promoting
activities:
After strength training:
It is profitable to stretch the heavily loaded muscles - but always remain
below the pain threshold -. The muscle groups that were only slightly
activated, on the other hand, may be put through extensive and dynamic
work.
After anaerobic power training:
Enough cool-down swimming stimulates the clearance of lactate and
accelerates the elimination of waste products from the fatigued muscle
groups.
After all types of training:
The type and sequence of food, which an athlete takes in after a training
session, is important. He should first drink and consequently replenish his
energy reserves by taking easy-digestible carbohydrates (within 20 to 30
min after the training). Then he should ingest proteins. It is also better to eat

several small meals a day than 2 or 3 large or substantial meals. Moreover,
dinner should be light and low-fat so the athlete can sleep well at night.
Physiotherapeutic treatment stimulates blood circulation in the organism
and/or may enhance relaxation. It has, therefore, a positive influence on
regeneration. This treatment, consisting a.o. in taking a relaxing bath, a
sauna (but not until at least 30 min after finishing the training unit), hotcold showers, light massages, etc. should, however, first be discussed with a
sports physician or physiotherapist.
Autogenic training and gradual muscle relaxing exercises can also further
accelerate the regenerative process.
Principle of Progressive Build-up of the Training Load
This principle is very important for structuring both the macrocycle and the
long-term plan (one year to multi-year plan). It is based on following
assessments:
1. A training stimulus normally leads to an increase of the
swimmer’s competitive performance. However, after some time,
that same stimulus will not sufficiently challenge the athlete’s
system anymore and no further adaptation will take place (see
Biological Adaptations)
2. An increase in training load will then be necessary to induce
further adaptation. This increase in training load can be achieved
in several ways:
by increasing either the training volume or intensity
by making the intervals longer
by making the implementation more difficult (e.g. first
small, then large hand paddles)
by increasing the load density (= close sequence of high
volume or intensive training units)
by changing the training environment (e.g. altitude
training)
3. The increase in training volume and intensity influences the
improvement of the competitive performance most. The increase

in training volume generally stimulates the swimmer’s ability to
handle or assimilate the training load, which in turns is a
prerequisite for a more effective increase in training intensity
4. The changes in training load must of course be in accordance
with:
the goals set for the respective training periods in the
macrocycle
the swimmer’s current conditioning profile
5. Sudden changes in training load work more efficiently for
improving competitive performance than smooth progressive
changes but need nevertheless to be implemented with care as any
excess may lead to injuries
6. The adaptation processes resulting from these sudden changes in
training load may differ in time and amplitude. It is thus important
to document each completed training session thoroughly in a
training log and to evaluate carefully and as precisely as possible
the induced conditioning adaptations
The training effects or adaptations to a sudden increase in training load are
always delayed and are not linear proportional to the load increase (fig. 75).

Fig. 75 Example of a sudden increase in training volume over a swimming
season of 11 months and the improvement in aerobic endurance it induced,
measured by means of a 30-minute test.
As described earlier, regeneration is the most important training as it
induces the super-compensation after a heavy training load. The
improvement in aerobic endurance, shown in figure 75, and recorded by the
maximal distance swum in a 30-minute test, does not immediately follow
the increase in training load but comes about a month later, after a period of
decreased training volume and intensity.
Moreover, this improvement in aerobic endurance is not linear proportional
to the increase in training load. Indeed, the better the aerobic endurance
becomes, the less it will be improved by an increase in training load.
Principle of Variation in Training Loads
Originally this principle comes from the sports didactics but is also
applicable to physiology and is based on following assessments:
1. A progressive improvement in competitive performance over a
longer period of time requires, especially in the top level training,

a systematic and purposive variation in training load, training
exercises and training methods. This variation ensures a
homogeneous development of all the basic components
determining the competition performance and will, therefore,
lower the risk of performance stagnation (= no further
improvement of the competition performance) considerably
2. A continued and unchanging load pattern may sometimes be used
over one extra mesocycle but only to stabilize an acquired training
effect. This is, for example, applicable for technique training when
a certain movement needs to be automated to such an extent that it
can be correctly executed even under extreme competition
pressure. However, during the build-up of the conditioning, it is
rarely the purpose of the training to concentrate on maintaining an
acquired training adaptation. Only in the peak form maintaining
period between important competitions, maintaining the acquired
training effects is an important objective
3. For elite swimmers room for variation, however, is very limited
as, in certain periods, they must train very specifically
Principle of Optimal Timing and Dosing of the Swim Specific and non Swim
Specific Types of Training and the Development of the Different
Performance Determining Components
This principle consists of a set of guidelines to assist coaches in choosing
for their swimmers the right type of training at the right moment in the right
proportion. It is based on both experimental evidence from different sport
science disciplines and on personal experience.
The development of sport specific and performance determining
conditioning components requires the right dosing and sequencing of the
different types of training. The dosing will be determined according to the
results of the conditioning tests. The sequence, on the other hand, is
independent of the swimmer’s performance level but must be adhered to in
the periodization process. Since the training objectives change during the
macrocycle, it is clear that the sequence and dosage of the different types of
training will vary accordingly.

The sequence of the different types of training has also to be build up
progressively, which means from simple to complex and from non swim
specific to swim specific. The time actually spent on non swim specific
types of training will considerably decrease as the swimmer’s competition
performance improves.
Moreover, with a few exceptions, the training work will be principally
voluminous and extensive (low intensity) in the beginning of the
macrocycle but will progressively become more intensive and at the end of
the macrocycle less voluminous.
Principle of Durability of the Development and Long-Term Build-up
This principle refers to following observations:
1. Only a continuous and consistent training program over many
years and without needless interruptions will lead to the optimal
development and stabilization of the competitive performance (=
continuity of the training process)
2. A fast development of a particular performance determining
component leads to a temporary and unstable conditioning
improvement which will be quickly lost again
3. Long interruptions of the training process cause a deterioration of
the acquired training adaptations
4. The rate at which conditioning components deteriorate, varies in
extent and time. Indeed, the swimmer first looses aerobic power
then aerobic capacity, then strength, speed, etc.
5. The success of the retraining (restoration of the lost conditioning)
depends on the swimmer’s age, his performance level and his
training background. Elite athletes generally have the best
conditioning stability and will recover quicker. Such is also the
case for young swimmers and for those athletes who went through
a continuous and consistent training program before the
interruption
6. When emphasizing a certain type of training (= the dominant
training objective) during a mesocycle the other conditioning
components need to go through maintenance training

Implementation
Periodization

of

these

Principles:

Procedure

of

Once the coach has collected the data from step 1
(Analysis of the Swimmer’s Current Performance Level and Training
Background) and step 2 (Set up of Intermediary Performance Objectives),
he can start the actual training structuring, i.e. order the important training
components in view of the systematic building of the competitive
performance. During this structuring, called periodization, he should
methodically and chronologically go through the following steps while
constantly keeping the above mentioned important training structuring
principles in mind:
1. Selection of the Competitions where Top Performances are
Expected
The first thing to do is to select and fix the important competitions
where top performances must be delivered. According to the rules of
the periodization (see Basics of Training Periodization) the coach may
select maximally 4 periods with top competitions
Age group swimmers, generally, work towards a maximum of 2 peaks
per year. More yearly peaks will take away from the time that should
be spent on the build-up of conditioning, which, in young swimmers,
remains the most important and overall objective to improve
competitive performance at a later age. Only elite athletes, who already
have a high conditioning level can consider 4 different peaks a year.
Not without due caution, however, as this clearly will be at the expense
of the stability of their “form”
2. Determination of the Number of Macrocycles per Year
The number of peak periods will determine the number of macrocycles
in the training year
3. Fixing Training Camps (Holidays), Exams and Test Competitions
This step influences largely both the duration and content of the
different mesocycles

School vacations, for example, are very useful for boosting the volume
and/or the number of training units per week, while the periods of
exams are, for most swimmers, associated with a sometimes drastic
reduction of the training units. For this reason the coach will, as much
as possible, let voluminous training periods coincide with vacations.
Intensive and/or voluminous training can also be planned until shortly
before the exams with the purpose of utilizing the exam period as
physical recovery phase
Swim camps also can in principle concur with the periods of
voluminous training. The training camps during Christmas and Easter
vacations, for example, are very important for building up the basic
capacities for respectively the winter (e.g. national and other
championships in the months of February or March) and summer peak
(e.g. national and other championships in the months of June, July or
August). During the competition period it is also useful to plan a
training camp not so much to improve the basic capacities but instead
to take advantage of a favorable training environment
It sometimes happens that a theoretically ideal training periodization is
not always feasible in reality. Often the coach will have to find a
compromise between what should ideally happen according to the
above mentioned rules, and what reality permits. A classic example of
this occurs in Belgium when the national championships follow the
exams within a short period (4 to 5 weeks). An ideal periodization is
not possible in this case, so the coach has to build up the basic
capacities before the exams and settle for a short refreshment of the
aerobic and anaerobic capacities when resuming training after the
exam period
Eventually, it is also useful to incorporate the test competitions in the
planning as soon as possible. These meets can be used as a type of
training (aerobic or anaerobic power) but at the same time they offer
the possibility to evaluate the training evolution
4.
Subdivision of First Macrocycle in Mesocycles and
Determination of the Training Content
The coach subdivides the macrocycle in different mesocycles and then
determines their main training objective (= the dominant training

adaptation aimed for). The more time needed to reap the benefit of a
dominant training exercise, the more time will have to be allotted to it.
Therefore, the largest part of the macrocycle will be spent on building
up the aerobic capacity as it is the slowest to develop. Next come
anaerobic capacity training and workouts to improve aerobic power.
The least time is devoted to training anaerobic power as it is the fastest
to adapt. Moreover, the length of each mesocycle mainly depends on
the swimmer’s aerobic capacity: the better the aerobic capacity, the
longer a mesocycle may last
Besides, it is also very important to first train the aerobic and anaerobic
capacities and only thereafter the respective powers
In practice the coach will thus:
4.1
starting from the top competition, first fix the time
needed for the power training (competition training period), then
set the base training period, i.e. the time necessary to train both the
aerobic and anaerobic capacities and last but not least determine
the length of each mesocycle. Here the coach clearly takes into
account the swimmer’s competition discipline and other individual
abilities to assimilate the training
Generally, for long distance swimmers, a competition training
period of 7 weeks including a taper phase of maximum 5 to 10 days
will do. Over the rest of the period the coach will then distribute
about 5 aerobic power training sessions, which he will make
progressively harder every week
For sprinters and middle distance swimmers the competition
training period varies from 5 to 10 weeks, whereby the stronger
their anaerobic capacity, the longer the competition period. The
taper phase (2 to 3 weeks) as well as the peak form inducing period
(2 x 3 weeks with a short intermezzo of aerobic capacity training)
will last longer for sprinters and middle distance swimmers with a
strong anaerobic capacity than for those having a moderate
anaerobic capacity. For the latter a competition training period
consisting of a peak form inducing period and a taper phase of
respectively 3 and 2 weeks will usually be sufficient

In addition to these general rules the coach’s experience also plays
a very important part in fixing the taper phase, which to lead to
peak form should respond to the individual and specific needs of
every swimmer
As there is no strong system to anticipate the individual “taper
needs” of the swimmers, the coach will have to rely on empirical
observations. He can evaluate whether the duration of the taper
phase is appropriate by extending it for one more week after the top
competition and concluding it with an additional competition. For
swimmers who perform better on this event he should consider not
only to adapt the training content of the next macrocycle but also to
lengthen the taper phase. For those who do not perform so well
during the second meeting, the taper phase as completed was just
right or possibly too long. The coach will only be able to make a
final evaluation of this last possibility by trying out a shorter taper
phase in the next macrocycle
The rest of the macrocycle consists of the base training period
which should last fairly long since building up both the aerobic and
anaerobic capacity takes up quite some time (at least 9 and 5 weeks
respectively)
Because the aerobic capacity training requires a high volume, it is
obvious that the coach will select the periods with a lot of training
possibilities (e.g. vacations) in order to plan and accentuate this
type of training. These periods of high load, however, need to be
followed by a regeneration phase for the super-compensation to
take place
4.2
broadly determine the dominant training adaptations
aimed for in the different mesocycles. These are not fixed
individually yet, but are rather targeted on the different groups of
swimmers
4.3
outline the training content. The most easiest way to do
so, is to order the training workouts in 3 distinctive categories:
exercises that are meant for the general conditioning
development

exercises aiming at a specific conditioning
development and taking the type of swimmer and his
competition discipline into account
competition specific exercises
The macrocycle will start with exercises of the first category but, as
it progresses, we will gradually pass to exercises of the second and
finally of the third category. This sequence of training exercises in
the periodization is determined by one of the 5 important principles
for structuring the training process, according to which the
exercises of a general nature should always precede the more
specific ones
The classification of the training exercises in these 3 categories
may do for the periodization of the basic training in the multi-year
plan. However, it is far too general and broad for the build-up and
top level training. For these training phases a more differentiated
and accurate categorization is required such as classifying the
exercises according to their training objective:
development of the general/basic or more complex
swim specific motor skills (kinesiological properties)
teaching or perfecting technique or tactics
testing to evaluate the conditioning
preparation of competition specific efforts (loads)
This subdivision can be further differentiated by assigning to every
exercise a degree of similarity to the competition effort and
competition stroke (biomechanics). This leads to the following
categories of training exercises (fig. 76):
GPE - General Preparatory Exercises:
these exercises show no similarities to competition either in
stroke or in the type of workload (they are called nonspecific exercises)
these exercises do not directly contribute to improving competition
performance. They do, however, contribute to developing the basic

conditioning and coordination necessary to acquire complex adaptations
from specific types of training

Fig. 76 Subdivision of the training exercises according to their degree of
similarity to both the competition effort and competition biomechanics.
GCORE - General Coordination Exercises:
these exercises apparently do not resemble the competition
movement at all; yet they lay the foundation for a good
senso-motor coordination which is required for swimming
(locomotor intelligence)
the load structure is not important as long as it does not
disturb the acquisition of the locomotor intelligence
GCONDE - General Conditioning Exercises:
these exercises differ from the competition stroke both
kinetically (with respect to time and space) and dynamically
(with respect to time and forces)
these exercises, alike the GPE, do not directly contribute to
improving competition performance. Instead they rather

stimulate the basic development of conditioning and
coordination abilities that are necessary to acquire complex
adaptations from specific types of training
the intensity of these exercises may vary from moderate to
high
BTE - Basic Technique Exercises:
these training exercises partially show a strong similarity to
the competition stroke and, as far as the type of load is
concerned, address the basic conditioning properties
required for swimming
BCONDE, Basic Conditioning Exercises:
the specific competition stroke is ever more integrated in
these training exercises
these exercises are often performed progressively, with the
most intensive repetition closely approaching the
competition load
STE - Specific Technique Exercises:
these training exercise or parts of it imitate the specific
competition movement and automate it even under difficult
coordination and/or technique conditions. They, thus, aim at
a perfect technique and a stable application of this technique
even in difficult situations
SCONDE - Specific Conditioning Exercises:
these training exercise or parts of it very closely resemble
the specific competition movement kinetically as well as
dynamically
these exercises are also both psychologically and physically
very demanding
COMPE - Complex Exercises:
these types of exercises have the same kinetic and dynamic
character as the race but are performed under extremely

difficult conditions (even more difficult than the race itself)
All these 3 different types of classifications characterize the exercises
according to their external features (dynamically and kinetically). The
internal processes, such as the biochemical, biological and
physiological reactions, induced by these exercises are not taken into
consideration
Further development in training physiology has lately added a
physiological dimension to the different types of training and, what’s
more, now allows the coach to reckon with the specific physiological
impact of the exercises on the swimmer’s organism and with his ability
to assimilate and adapt to the diversity of training forms. It is in the
light of these most recent developments that we worked out a new
physiologically based classification of the training exercises wherein
we distinguish 4 categories: the aerobic and anaerobic capacity and the
aerobic and anaerobic power (see Classification of Training Exercises)
In the modern approach of the training periodization we will, thus, not
only consider the external features of the exercises, such as the load
structure and movement patterns, but also take their physiological
aspects into account. Therefore, we will, in establishing the sequence
of the training workouts:
1. from a techno-motor point of view, start with the simple
training exercises and progressively proceed to more complex
types
2. from a physiological point of view, always have capacity
training preceding power training (i.e. maximal force and
aerobic and anaerobic capacity training before respectively
explosive or endurance strength training and aerobic and
anaerobic power training)
4.4
Once we have subdivided the macrocycle in different
mesocycles, fixed, for each of these mesocycles, the training
objectives and, in broad outlines, also progressively scheduled the
training content, we will proportion the different types of
exercises. In each mesocycle the same types of exercises may
recur but it is the proportioning of these types of training workouts

over a longer period (usually the mesocycle) that will determine
the dominant training adaptation (= the training objective of the
mesocycle)
Therefore, beside exercise characterizing factors such as volume,
intensity, fraction and rest, the manipulation of which will induce
particular biological adaptations and determine the type of exercise,
we will now also consider the proportioning (the dosing) of the
different types of exercises over a period of time, usually a
mesocycle. The dosing is mostly expressed per week and refers to:
the training frequency: how many training sessions per
week
the training volume: how many km per week
the load frequency: how often per week do we plan one
particular type of training
the load density: how quickly do the different training
exercises follow each other
Once the dosing of the different types of exercises is fixed, the
coach will have to select the appropriate training methods. For
workouts with a conditioning nature, such as the aerobic and
anaerobic endurance and strength, he may choose between
continuous swims, interval sets, all-out sets, tests, competitions,
control sets in training, etc. For the more technical and tactical
exercises he has global and analytical training methods at his
disposal

Summary In conclusion we present a synopsis of the chronological
sequence of the different steps that have to be taken in the periodization
process. Beside each step we also list one of the 5 important training
structuring principles that should especially be taken into consideration
(tab. 21).

THE REALIZATION PHASE
Introduction: The Individual Optimization of the
Training Process

It is, however, not enough to have good intentions and write beautiful
training plans on paper; these plans need also to be carried out. The final
result of the completed training, in other words, the competition
performance, will mainly depend on the precision and effectiveness of
concretizing the plans.
It is fairly clear that a swimmer who is just transferring to the competition
group cannot complete the same training as a competition swimmer who
has already several years of training behind him. Also swimmers from one
and the same group, which at first glance looks quite homogeneous as far as
the competition performance and the main discipline are concerned, may
each react very differently to identical training exercises. An individualized
adaptation of the training is thus an absolute necessity if we want to reap
maximum benefit from it.
For the individualization of the training 2 important aspects come forward:
1. the swimmer’s training habits
2. the swimmer’s individual ability to adapt (morphologically and
conditionally) to the different training types

The Swimmer’s Training Habits
Training adaptation, of whatever nature, can only take place if the organism
is sufficiently stimulated. When creating an adequate training stimulus, we
must thus take the swimmer’s training habits into account.
This also implies that we must be careful with creating habits. Young
swimmers whom we take up to high training volume too soon, will get used
to this training rhythm but will not improve their conditioning
proportionally to the work completed. If we then wish to improve these
swimmers’ competition performance still more, we will have to boost the
volume even more. But at a certain moment boosting the number of
swimming hours will start conflicting with other activities such as school
commitments, etc. and, which is even worse, will lead to overtraining
without ever seeing the result of the work completed.

The Swimmer’s Individual Ability to Adapt (Morphologically
and Conditionally) to the Different Training Types

During the macrocycle we will repeatedly evaluate the evolution of the
swimmer’s competitive performance (the conditional, biomechanical and
mental profile) according to the completed training. This process is very
important for the continuous individualization and optimization of the
training program, since it gives guidelines with respect to:
the swimmer’s general ability to handle and assimilate training
the appropriate intensity and volume for each type of exercise
the necessity and priority of the different types of exercises
Indeed, based on these findings the training program for the next period is
adapted to the swimmer’s current conditioning profile, his adaptation ability
and individual needs. This individual optimization of the training process is
necessary to get the best possible training effect. No energy is wasted on
types of training or efforts that do not contribute in the broadest sense to
improving the competition performance.
Yet the ideal/optimal analysis of the swimmer’s actual competitive
performance needs to meet some essential conditions:
The test must not only be swim but also stroke and discipline
specific. Testing swimmers on a bicycle or treadmill in order to
obtain the right information for water training is like taking the
temperature with a barometer; both have to do with weather but
measure something quite different
The importance of a sports specific conditioning test was already
demonstrated by Holmer in 1974 through a longitudinal study of the
evolution of the aerobic capacity of elite swimmers on the treadmill
and in the swimming pool (fig. 77). The swimmers’ aerobic capacity
measured on the treadmill remained unchanged while the one
measured in the water clearly changed

Fig. 77 Only a sport specific test procedure gives a reliable view on the
sport specific condition and reliable information for the training.
This analysis must also be carried out as precisely and
completely as possible. The complexity as well as the multidisciplinary nature of the test will increase along with the
swimmer’s performance level. This is necessary because, as the
athlete’s performance level improves, the detection of his
conditioning strengths and weaknesses becomes increasingly
more difficult and the guidelines for the training framing,
planning and periodization need to be more precise in order to
still further improve his competition performance
An overview of the different test possibilities for the determination of the
athlete’s current competitive performance is shown in table 22.

Once we have diagnosed the competitive performance, we will evaluate its
evolution according to the completed training. It is thus essential for the
swimmer to keep a training logbook and to accurately record and document
the training he has actually completed, in order to provide an overview of
volume, intensity, load frequency as well as load density of the different
exercise categories. The analysis of the training diary is then meant to:
*
*

verify if the execution of the training tallies with the planning
evaluate both the completed training and the effects it induced

Example of Training Analysis

In a group of young promising
swimmers, preparing for the national winter championships in the
beginning of February, the evolution of the conditioning (between October
and March) was ascertained by means of lactate tests, consisting of a
submaximal 400 m freestyle followed, after complete rest, by a 100 m or
200 m all-out in the personal stroke. The test procedure remained the same
for each swimmer during this observation period. The periodization with
the distribution of volume and intensity as completed within this
macrocycle is shown in figure 78.

Fig. 78 Periodization with the distribution of volume and intensity as
completed during the winter macrocycle.
The top part of figure 79 shows the evolution of the aerobic endurance,
expressed by the 4 mmol/l lactate speed on 400 m freestyle (V4400 ) and of
the anaerobic performance, reflected by the highest lactate concentration
after the 100 m or 200 m all-out in the personal best stroke. In the middle
and at the bottom of the figure you will find the distribution of the intensive
and extensive training exercises performed in-between the lactate tests.
Period I:
Training documentation: This period is characterized by a wave-shape
increase in the number of kilometers/week (fig. 78). Only 10.8% of the
weekly volume (= 3.5 km/week) is completed with an intensity of more
than 1.5 mmol/l lactate. Exercises within the intensity range of 1.5 to 2.5
mmol/l lactate and above 2.5 mmol/l lactate were respectively proportioned
to a load density of 1.4 and 0.9 training blocks/week (fig. 79). These
exercises will, along with three 25 m sprints 2 to 3 times per week, make
sure the anaerobic capacity is kept to standard and does not get broken
down by the increase in training volume.

Fig. 79 Top: Evolution of the aerobic endurance, expressed by the 4 mmol/l
lactate speed on 400 m freestyle (V4400 ) and of the anaerobic performance,
reflected by the highest lactate concentration after the 100 m or 200 m allout in the swimmer’s best stroke (Lamax). Middle and bottom: Overview of
the intensive and extensive training exercises performed in-between the
lactate tests.

Training effect: This training period of 2 months led to the improvement in
aerobic endurance (4 mmol/l lactate speed at 400 m freestyle) averaging 12
sec. The highest lactate concentration (Lamax) after the all-out swims
decreased, however, with an average of 1.2 mmol/l (fig. 79 top). This
decrease could certainly not have been predicted based on the average
training volume (32.5 km/week).
Training adjustment: The lower Lamax needs to be compensated for by
inserting intensive training blocks (>1.5 mmol/l) more often per week.
Beyond that, the fall break will be used to significantly increase the training
volume.
Period II:
Training documentation: The swimmer completed, per week, about 1.7
training unit and 11.1 km more than in the previous training period. The
workouts under 1.5 mmol/l lactate rose from 89.2% to 93.2% of the total
weekly volume while the percentage of exercises performed at more than
1.5 mmol/l was reduced from 10.8% (period I) to 6.8% (3.0 km/week). The
weekly number of training blocks within the intensity range of 1.5 to 2.5
mmol/l lactate, between 2.5 and 5 mmol/l lactate and above 5.0 mmol/l
lactate was clearly higher than in the first period and rose to respectively
1.8, 0.9 and 1.4 training blocks per week. The total volume of these
exercises was 920 m/week as compared to 580 m/week in period I.
Training effect: The level of the aerobic endurance was clearly preserved
(in fact, the time span between the period of high volume and the test date
was too short to be able to measure any improvement in aerobic endurance)
and Lamax again rose to the reference value of October.
Training adjustment: From now on we will pay more attention to building
up the specific competition conditioning and concentrate on power and
frequency sets.
Period III:
Training documentation: Up until the winter championships training was
globally less voluminous but much more intensive. The peak form period
was extended by inserting a small mesocycle of high volume and almost
exclusively regeneration training immediately after the Flemish
championships.

Training effect: We managed to keep up the aerobic endurance quite well
despite the lower training volume and more of competitions. Lamax rose
slightly.
This example presents some interesting findings:
1. Increasing the training volume improves the aerobic endurance
but may, if not optimally compensated by anaerobic capacity
exercises, depress the maximum attainable lactate concentration
2. On average, 2 intensive blocks per week (in training or
competition) will do to develop the anaerobic conditioning; this
dosing, however, is very individual and requires a accurate
evaluation
3. The improvement of the anaerobic conditioning is much more
related to the weekly number of intensive training exercise blocks
than to the volume of these exercises
4. The level of aerobic endurance can easily be maintained despite
intensive training or competitions if these heavy loads are
compensated for by a lot of regeneration training
5. The improvement of the aerobic capacity is stimulated by a few
short intensive parts in the aerobic training
The following figure shows the training analysis of a World class female
breaststroke swimmer in combination with the evolution of her conditioning
and her biomechanical/motor development (fig. 80). During the winter
period we already planned 2 competition peaks (Palma and World Cup),
which is not particularly easy going, but here too we can observe that the
aerobic endurance can be maintained despite an intensive competition
period (March).

Fig. 80 Training analysis of an elite female breaststroke swimmer. Training
volume and intensity are shown graphically along with the conditioning and
biomechanical evolution.
Concerning the motor development we see that the efficiency of the
breaststroke motion increases after voluminous training work in the
personal stroke. The maximal stroke frequency (stroke rate), however,
drops sharply, and, since it clearly lies below the ideal competition stroke
frequency, this gain in motion efficiency does not translate into an
improvement in competition performance. We will only reach an optimal
relation between stroke frequency and motion efficiency after specific
training exercises such as frequency training.

The Steering Principle
The training steering or monitoring starts with the analysis of the
swimmer’s current competitive performance. According to the appointed
conditioning properties we will then:
*
determine the training objectives (= what needs to be trained
during the next period)

*
select the most appropriate the types of training (= the types of
exercises that fit best the swimmer’s present needs and trainability)
* design a training structure for a period of 5 to 15 weeks
Once this training period perfected, the swimmer’s competitive
performance is evaluated again in order to get a good picture of the benefit
of the completed training. Experimental research has namely clearly shown
that identical training plans can lead to different training effects even for
swimmers with identical conditioning and morphological properties. It is
thus essential for the coach to exactly know and assess the swimmer’s
individual adaptations to the different training programs.
The perfected training period is thus evaluated by repeating the test used for
designing the first training structure, whereupon the coach tries to link up
the measured changes in conditioning with the actual completed training
program without however omitting to consider additional factors such as,
for example, the swimmer’s competition results, his attendance at the
training sessions, his state of health, environmental factors (exams, school
commitments, etc.). The purpose of the training evaluation is by no means
to reprove the coach for what did not succeed but rather to check the
appropriateness of his training planning and periodization and if necessary
to look for a higher yield in the next training period.
According to the results of the evaluation of the first training period the
training plans for the next period will be adapted or otherwise. We call this
“training steering (monitoring)”. The changes or adaptations (adjustments)
to be made can vary in nature and refer to:
*
*
*
*

the training intensity
the training volume
the distribution of the 4 main training exercise classes
the composition of the exercises

The training objectives will evolve and change, but the cyclic steering
principle (fig. 81) will keep recurring during the entire course of the season.

Fig. 81 Cycle of training steering (monitoring) after Grosser 1981.

Chapter 9
TEMPLATES FOR
PLANNING AND PERIODIZATION
To put the coach on the track to plan and periodize his training in a
systematic and well-considered way we have drawn up frameworks for
scheduling:
*
*
*
*

a multi-year plan
a year plan
a macrocycle with different periodizations
a meso- and microcycle

The plans of work for the macro-, meso- and microcycle are supplemented
with practical and useful guidelines and directives ensuring a gradual
proceeding.
All these frames are not only helpful for the training planning and
periodization but can also be used to document the most important
observations and data of the effectuated training. This training
documentation will thereby help to keep an overview of the completed
training and provide the basis for the evaluation of the training effects.
Enjoy yourself .......

and good luck!!!!

GLOSSARY OF THE BASIC
TERMINOLOGY AND CONCEPTS
-AAcidosis
The production of lactate leads to acidification, which, if it becomes too strong, will significantly
hinder further energy production. The acidosis will block the activity of important enzymes that
enable the glycolysis to take place. As a result, this will reduce the energy provided by the
glycolysis. The athlete will then no longer have enough energy at his disposal to continue his
exertion with the same intensity and he will have to slow down.
The acidosis depends strongly on the rate (= quantity per second) at which pyruvate is converted
into lactate. At a low rate of conversion, the acidosis can easily be neutralized in the muscle cell.
At a high rate of conversion, the buffer capacity in the muscle cell will no longer be able to
counter that acidosis and the intra-muscular pH will decrease due to the accumulating H+ ions. At
this stage, the acidosis becomes so pronounced that it will reduce further glycolysis activity and,
consequently, the energy production by this system.
Acidosis tolerance
This term, often used by coaches, refers to the extent a swimmer can tolerate the acidosis. The
exact physiological processes behind this concept are unclear.
Adenosinemonophosphate (AMP), -diphosphate (ADP) and -triphosphate (ATP)
The muscular system’s performance capacity is determined principally by the amount of energy
made available for muscular activity. The more energy that is made available per second, the
harder (more intensely) the muscle can operate. If, for any reason less energy is made available,
the intensity of muscular activity will decrease, forcing the athlete to slow down.
The production of energy occurs in the muscle cell and is transmitted to the working muscle
elements via ATP (adenosine tri phosphate). The working muscle captures the energy carried by
ATP, converting ATP at that point into energy-poor ADP (adenosine di phosphate) or AMP
(adenosine mono phosphate). ATP is present in the muscle in only very small quantities and must,
therefore, be supplemented during exercise. If this does not happen, the muscle will very quickly
experience an energy deficiency, forcing the athlete to interrupt or slow down the exercise until
sufficient energy is again available.
Aerobic
Aerobic comes from a Greek word meaning air. It is used here to refer to the metabolic activity
that requires oxygen to produce energy. We have one aerobic system as opposed to two anaerobic
systems.
Aerobic - Anaerobic metabolism
Three different biochemical processes can recharge energy-poor ADP to energy-rich ATP
(rephosphorylation of ADP). Two of these processes can occur without requiring oxygen and are
therefore called anaerobic metabolic systems; one is the anaerobic alactic energy production
system and the other is called the anaerobic lactic energy production system. The third

biochemical process requires oxygen to generate energy-rich ATP; we call it therefore the aerobic
metabolic system .
Aerobic capacity
Aerobic capacity is the maximum amount of oxygen one can consume per minute. It is also called
VO 2 max. Some sources in literature consider VO 2 max as a parameter of power and not of
capacity. With respect to its unit of measure (VO 2 max is expressed per unit of time) it can
indeed be seen as a parameter of power. According to its physiological meaning however, it refers
to a capacity. We join in the last argumentation and define, in line with Hollmann and Hettinger
(1990), VO 2 max as a parameter of capacity.
The higher the aerobic capacity, the better the performance in competition “can” be and the faster
the regeneration process after training and competition will start. The aerobic capacity is
constantly changing as an athlete goes through the training cycle. It is however thought that each
individual has an innate maximum aerobic capacity that is genetically determined.
Aerobic capacity training
This training is set up mainly to increase the maximum uptake of oxygen per minute
(physiological adaptation induced: rise of VO 2 max). This type of exercise lays the basis for the
swimmer’s conditioning and is therefore not only essential for the long distance swimmer but also
for the sprinter. It will thus, take up the largest part of the base training period in the periodization.
During the competition training period the aerobic capacity workouts will be performed less
frequently and at a lower intensity as, during this period, their only purpose is to maintain the
acquired aerobic capacity and to counterbalance the intensive training work (anaerobic capacity,
anaerobic power or aerobic power workouts).
Checklist for the aerobic capacity exercises:

1. high volume (for sprinters, the intervals and the total distance of the workouts are
generally shorter than for long distance swimmers)

2. low intensity during the major part of the exercise but “spiced” with some intensive
bouts at the beginning of the workout
3. little rest between the intervals
Aerobic conditioning
Refers to the training process that improves the aerobic capacity or power.
Aerobic endurance
Refers to the 4 mmol/l lactate speed. The contribution of aerobic capacity or aerobic power to the
4 mmol/l lactate speed, which quantifies the aerobic endurance, is not clearly defined.
Aerobic energy supply/delivery
The contribution of energy that metabolically is provided by the aerobic system is defined as
aerobic energy supply or aerobic energy delivery. The aerobic capacity (VO 2 max) determines

the maximal amount of energy that can be produced by the aerobic energy system during a
physical activity.
Aerobic power
Aerobic power is the percentage of aerobic capacity that can be used during an athletic event. The
higher this percentage, the better the aerobic power. Various metabolic factors prevent an athlete
from using 100% of his aerobic capacity during the event. The lactate threshold or maximum
lactate steady state is a good measure for the aerobic power. Aerobic power is directly affected by
the anaerobic capacity. The higher the anaerobic capacity is, the more it becomes difficult to
achieve a high aerobic power.
Aerobic power training
This training is set up mainly to maximize the use of one’s aerobic capacity (physiological
adaptation induced: increasing the % of VO 2 max that can be maintained during long distance
exercises). This type of exercise is necessary to complete the training work. It will, therefore, be
principally planned during the pre-competition training period and it should be swum in the main
stroke (medley swimmers will now swim medley and freestyle sets). From a physiological point
of view, the importance of this type of workout increases in accordance with the length of the
competition event for which the swimmer is preparing. For 100 and 200 m races, this type of
training is not a must, but for races longer than 200 m it is an absolutely essential part of the precompetition training period.
As results from this type of training should not be expected within 3 weeks, the coach is
compelled to start this type of training at least 6 weeks before the important competition event.
Checklist for the aerobic power exercises:

1. stay around the competition distance (for a 400 m swimmer the workout may be 500 m
long and be repeated 2 or 3 times)
2. the rest is always short (5 to 15 sec) and the repeat distance is adjusted to enable the
swimmer to maintain competition speed or just a little bit faster
3. as the swimmer gets closer to the competition, the coach will make these swim sets
progressively harder by shortening the rest in proportion to the repeat distance. Example:
in the beginning an aerobic power series consists mainly of 50 and 100 m intervals with
15 sec rest. In the following weeks the athlete swims longer intervals (100 and 200 m)
but with the same or less rest
Aerobic threshold
Aerobic threshold is not frequently used in the popular literature but is often seen in the academic
journals. Although different definitions are available, it means mostly the point where lactate
starts to rise from a baseline, also called the OBLA (onset of blood lactate accumulation). It
corresponds to a lower speed than the lactate threshold (MaxLa ss or anaerobic threshold). If an
athlete exercises at an effort level above the aerobic threshold he may still achieve a lactate steady
state.
Age group

Refers to young swimmers in general, without a specific range of ages.
Alactic
Refers to energy supply or an effort without production of lactate.
All-out swim
All-out swim means that the athlete provides a maximum effort. The athlete should be completely
exhausted after this exercise. If an all-out swim is performed over a short period (40 - 90
seconds), lactate after this effort can be used to assess the anaerobic capacity.
Anabolic
Refers to the biological condition promoting the building-up processes.
Anaerobic
Anaerobic means without air. It is used here to refer to the metabolic activity that can produce
energy without oxygen. There are two anaerobic systems as opposed to one aerobic system. The
two anaerobic systems are the creatine phosphate system (also called the anaerobic alactic energy
system) and the glycolytic system (also called the anaerobic lactic energy system).
Anaerobic capacity
The anaerobic capacity is the maximum amount of pyruvate that can be produced per second by
the glycolysis. It is frequently called VLamax (in some literature also PLamax). Since the
conversion from pyruvate into lactate and vice versa occurs very quickly, the ratio between the
muscle concentrations of lactate and pyruvate is described as being 1/1. You may therefore find in
literature on the subject the label “production of lactate” for what we refer to as “the production of
pyruvate”. You may further find that the units of the anaerobic capacity are expressed in “mmol of
lactate per liter and per second” instead of “mmol of pyruvate per liter and per second”. This may
sound confusing but is in fact quite simple since they are counterparts.
The anaerobic capacity can change as the athlete goes through the training cycle. It is thought that
each individual has an innate maximum anaerobic capacity that is genetically determined.
However, some coaches and sports scientists have observed growth in this capacity after years of
training.
Note:
This term has many other meanings. The definition we provide is not
common by many in the academic literature. The anaerobic capacity is also used to refer to
the amount of anaerobic energy that is released during maximum activity as opposed to
the highest possible rate of glycolytic energy release.
Anaerobic capacity training
This training is set up mainly to increase the capacity to break down carbohydrates anaerobically
(physiological adaptation induced: rise of glycolytic rate = VLamax, PLamax or maximal lactate
production rate). This type of training also plays an important part in the base training period and,
to a smaller extent, in the competition training period where it is mainly used for maintenance
purposes. Preferably, the anaerobic capacity exercises are inserted into the first half of the training
session. This type of workout also lays the basis for the tough anaerobic power work that will
come up later and must therefore certainly precede the anaerobic power sets.
Checklist for the anaerobic capacity exercises:
1.
short intervals (25-50 m)
2.
each repetition must be swum just a little slower than maximum pace

3. the rest must be at least as long as the exertion time span, preferably, even 2 times the
exertion time
4.
contrary to all other types of training, passive rest is better than active rest
A trick to control the intensity of the anaerobic capacity sets is to insert an all-out sprint early in
the set:
if the time of this sprint is more than 1.5 sec/50 m faster than the previous repetitions
then the previous repeats were too slow and the remaining reps have to be swum faster
if the time of this sprint is less than 1 sec/50 m faster than the previous repetitions then
the previous swims were too fast and the remaining reps have to be swum slightly slower
Anaerobic conditioning
Refers to the training process that improves the anaerobic capacity or power.
Anaerobic energy supply/delivery
The contribution of energy that metabolically is provided by the anaerobic lactic system
(glycolysis) is defined as the anaerobic energy supply or anaerobic energy delivery. The
anaerobic capacity (VLamax) determines the maximal amount of energy that can be produced by
the anaerobic lactic energy system during a physical activity.
Anaerobic power
The anaerobic power is the percentage of anaerobic capacity that can be used during an athletic
event. Various metabolic factors prevent an athlete from using 100% of his anaerobic capacity
during the entire event. For very short events the anaerobic power will near 100% of the anaerobic
capacity. Anaerobic power is directly affected by the aerobic capacity, anaerobic capacity,
buffering and lactate tolerance. The higher the aerobic capacity, the higher the anaerobic power
will be, as the aerobic system eliminates the lactate produced.
Anaerobic power training
This training is set up mainly to maximize the use of one’s anaerobic capacity (physiological
adaptation induced: increasing the involved percentage of VLamax that can be maintained during
a high level effort in training or in competition). This type of exercise is also used in the
competition training period. The anaerobic training at the end of the base training period is meant
to increase the ability to produce more lactate (anaerobic capacity training). The anaerobic power
training in the competition training period is a.o. used to toughen the swimmer against acidosis.
This adaptation can be completed quite quickly (2 weeks).
Checklist for the anaerobic power exercises:
1. maximum swim speed (starting with the first repetition)
2. short repeat distances; these must allow a maximum swim speed
3. very little rest (5 to 10 sec depending on the interval being used - 25 or 50 m)
The total distance of an anaerobic power set is very low (125 to 250 m). For top level swimmers,
the volume can be increased to 600 m but should then be split in sets of 100 to 300 m with 10 to
20 min rest between each set.
Anaerobic threshold
The anaerobic threshold has many meanings. We use it to mean the maximum effort that can be
sustained for an extended period of time without lactate steadily accumulating. We prefer the term
lactate threshold or maximum lactate steady state (MaxLa ss ) instead.

-BBase training period
This training period is the first part of a macrocycle and is focused on building up the basic
conditioning components.
Basic training phase
This phase of a swimmer’s career starts between 10 and 12 years of age and lasts about 4 years. In
this training phase the emphasis lays on:
the general physical development, as broad as possible, of the beginner and age group
swimmer
stroke technique and coordination (starts/turns)
the development of the swimmer’s capacity of assimilating the training load
non swim specific activities
the swimmer’s health status
Biological adaptation
The adaptations of the human organism follow a regular pattern. During the first 1 to 2 weeks of a
new training cycle the body adapts quickly to the new stimulus. In the next few weeks the power
of this same stimulus to provoke an adaptation will progressively fade to end up completely after
6 weeks. We therefore call week 1 and 2 of the adaptation process the “fast adaptation phase”
and weeks 3 to 6 the “stabilization phase” .
After the body stops responding to the current training load (intensity and/or volume), it is
necessary to increase it to induce further adaptation. This means that, after about 6 weeks, training
should be modified by either:

1. increasing the training volume
2. increasing the training intensity
3. increasing the frequency per week of training units or intensive workouts
4. changing the proportion of workouts in each stroke (e.g. changing from freestyle to
breaststroke while keeping volume and intensity the same)
5. making the training program more difficult by changing the training environment such
as training at altitude or by reducing the regenerative training between intensive
workouts (e.g. maintaining the same number of intensive workouts per week but with
less extensive training units between them)
6. a combination of the changes in points 1-5
Why wait 6 weeks before introducing a new stimulus or a new training load? Why not change the
training plan after 2 weeks when the stimulus has induced its fast adaptation? The reason is that
weeks 3 to 6 are necessary to stabilize the adaptations brought about in weeks 1 and 2.
Biological maturity/age
Young swimmers of the same age may differ from a biological perspective. Some 10 year old
boys may have the biological status of 8 year old boys while other male swimmers aged 10 may
reach the biological status of swimmers aged 12. This example shows a different biological

maturity as opposed to an identical chronological age. The biological maturity is also expressed
by the biological age.
Breath control training
In this type of exercise we ask the swimmer to breathe once every x-number of strokes. Originally
it was thought that this type of training, by analogy with altitude training, would restrict the
availability of oxygen to be taken up by the red blood cells and in doing so, it would provide an
extra stimulus for the improvement of the endurance capacity. This, however, has never been
proven experimentally. Breathing a lot or a little has no effect on the swimmer’s aerobic
conditioning. It is therefore not appropriate to label this type of training as “hypoxia” training or
to consider it as a surrogate to training at altitude. The term hypoxia training has been used
erroneously for many years. It is now proper to refer to it as breath control training.
Buffering
Buffering is the ability of the body to neutralize part of the acid that is built up in the body when
lactate starts to accumulate rapidly (metabolic acidosis). This can improve by training, but how
much is still not well understood.
The most important system to buffer the acidosis in blood uses the plasma HCO 3 - ions
(bicarbonates). HCO 3 - picks up the H + ions that are responsible for the acidosis, and forms H 2
CO 3 that will dissociate in H 2 O and CO 2 . Hb and other plasma proteins contribute to a minor
extent to neutralize the acidosis.
Build-up training phase
This phase of a swimmer’s career starts between 14 and 16 years of age and lasts at least 3 years.
This phase of the multi-year plan:
runs to about 3 years before peak form age, which in disciplines, where endurance and
strength determine the competition performance, presumably lies between 23 and 26
years. In swimming disciplines with a high technical factor, however, peak form age is
reached faster which obviously shortens the build-up phase
emphasizes besides endurance and strength, also the mental development such as the
willingness to go all-out, the dealing with setbacks or failures, the competitiveness, the
concentration power, the desire for training, etc.
can easily take up 3 to 7 years
In this phase:
the training load is further increased by lengthening the duration of the training units.
Only in a later stage and depending on the conditioning level of the swimmer the
number of training units per week may again be raised (possibly even to several training
units a day)
more swim specific training and conditioning will be included. Participation in other
sport activities is still allowed but only if it supports the swim specific physical
development
attention should be paid to the structure of the training process, i.e. the training
periodization
attention should also be paid to perfecting stroke techniques which the swimmer must be
able to execute correctly in varying situations

-CCapacity training exercises
The workouts that are principally meant to build up the swimmer’s conditioning are labeled as
capacity training exercises. The increase of the aerobic capacity (= maximal oxygen uptake, VO 2
max), the anaerobic capacity (= increase the breakdown of carbohydrates, i.e. glycolysis) as well
as the increase of maximal force fall under this category.
Carbohydrates
Are organic compounds including sugars, starches, glucose and glycogen.
Catabolic
Refers to the biological condition promoting the breakdown processes.
Chronological age
See biological maturity.
Class effect
Refers to the major biological and functional adaptation(s) induced by a training exercise.
Clearance
The term “clearance” is used to describe the elimination of a substrate in the blood over time. Two
separate but related processes are involved in the clearance of blood lactate:
the process by which lactate moves from the muscles to the bloodstream. Evidence of
this is seen by the rising levels of lactate in the blood as lactate leaves the muscles. This
is what you would expect as lactate moves from an area of higher concentration to one
of lower concentration. This is sometimes referred to as the appearance of lactate
the process of removing lactate from the bloodstream (see elimination and lactate
shuttle)
When lactate is measured in the blood, the reading is the net effect of both the appearance and
elimination processes. During a steady state workout, these processes offset each other.
Competition training period
This competition training period is the second part of a macrocycle and is split in:
a pre-competition training period or peak form inducing training period. During this
period all efforts are focused on the fine-tuning and optimization of the acquired basic
conditioning components (e.g. aerobic and anaerobic capacities, mental preparation,
stress tolerance) in order to realize a top performance
an in-between competition training period or peak form maintaining training period. The
main objective here is the stabilization of the peak form
Conditioning profile
This mapping describes in detail the physical conditioning of the athlete. It contains at least an
estimation of his aerobic and anaerobic capacity.
Continuous swimming
This type of exercise consists in swimming continuously (during at least 15 min) and is especially
useful in combination with short intensive workouts to improve the aerobic capacity.

Control test
A control test, sometimes also called spot test, is a test that is used to assess some current aspects
of the athlete’s fitness. It is frequently used to confirm the findings of a standard lactate test, to see
if an adaptation has occurred or if an athlete is exercising at the proper intensity.
Creatine phosphate system
This is one of the 2 anaerobic energy systems. It produces energy very quickly, without any
lactate release but for only a very short time. The energy results from the breakdown of creatine
phosphate.

-DDeclining return on training investment
Studies have shown that the rate of improvement in conditioning is not linear to the increase of
training load. As a matter of fact, the effect of an increase in training load (increase of intensity
and/or volume) will be different depending upon the conditioning level of the swimmer. Indeed,
the better the conditioning level, the greater the training load that will be needed to make even
slight improvements. Consequently, the risks of injury and overtraining will be greater. Or, to put
it differently, the better the swimmer, the less improvement a same increase in training load will
produce. This phenomenon is called the principle of declining return on training investment and is
applicable to all kinds of training adaptations.
Design phase
The whole process of making training plans goes through various steps that can mainly be
bundled in 2 distinctive phases:
- the design phase
- the realization phase (execution and steering)
The design phase consists of 4 steps:
Step 1:
Analysis of the swimmer’s current performance level and training
background
Step 2
Set up of (intermediary) performance objectives
Step 3:
Determination of the training structure
Step 4:
Design of the training structure
Detraining process
Whenever an athlete stops training, a “detraining” process sets in, inducing a relatively rapid loss
of the acquired adaptation. So the detraining process means the deterioration of fitness gains
towards untrained levels when training is stopped.
Drill
Drills are training exercises that aim at the automation or improvement of technical skills once the
learning process is completed.

-EEnergy supply
A working muscle needs energy to perform any activity. This energy is supplied/delivered by
metabolic processes in the muscle. The higher this energy supply, the more intensely (faster) one
can exercise.
Endurance capacity
See aerobic capacity.

Endurance force
The endurance force describes the ability of a muscle group to sustain a workload for a longer
period of time. The higher the endurance force, the higher the workload that can be maintained
during a longer period of time.
Enzymes
Enzymes are proteins that have a multitude of purposes. One of the outcomes of training is the
addition or reduction of various enzymes that facilitate or block the energy production.
Extensive
The terms “extensive” and “intensive” refer to different characteristics of the training efforts
depending upon whether they are used in Europe or in the US and Canada. European coaches use
both terms to refer to the intensity of the training sets (resp. low intensity and high intensity) while
the Americans and Canadians rather assign these terms to the volume of the exercise. In this book
“extensive” and “intensive” refer to respectively “low intensity (low swimming speed)” and “high
intensity (fast swimming speed)”.

-FFat combustion
Fat can be used as fuel for the metabolic processes to produce energy for the muscular activity. In
first instance fat is broken down to fragments that than can be combusted by means of oxygen.
This process is called “fat combustion”.
Fine-tuning
Training meant to maximize the contribution of the various conditioning components and to
provide an optimal synergism between them with respect to the competition the athlete is
preparing for.
Fraction
See repeat distance or interval.
Frequency training
Training exercises meant to either increase the arm stroke frequency (rate) but without slipping
through the water or to reduce slipping through the water at given stroke frequency. The purpose
of these exercises is to improve swimming economy.
Functional adaptation
Training improves the physical performance capacity by inducing structural and functional
adaptations. Structural adaptations are characterized by the creation of new or the reconstruction
of existing biological components (proteins, etc.) while functional adaptations are based on a
better or more efficient activity of existing biological components.

-GGlycogen
Glycogen is a chain of glucose molecules. Glucose is the carbohydrate used by the body for
energy production. Glycogen breaks down into a substance called pyruvate and produces energy
during this process; energy often referred to as anaerobic energy because it is produced without
oxygen.
Glycolysis
Glycolysis comes from the Greek word “glyko” which means sugar and “lysis” meaning to break
down; so the glycolysis is an anaerobic process that breaks down glycogen or glucose molecules

(sugar). This process produces energy (glycolytic energy) quickly but not as fast as the creatine
phosphate system.
Glycolytic capacity
See glycolytic rate.
Glycolytic rate
Refers to the amount of glycogen/glucose molecules that can be broken down per second by the
glycolysis.
Graded exercise test
See progressive exercise test.

-HHeart rate deflection point (Conconi)
The heart rate deflection point is the point where increases in heart rate slow down compared to
increases in effort level. Up to a certain point heart rates rise linearly as the effort or speed
increase. Some coaches and researchers have correlated the heart rate deflection point with the
lactate threshold. Its main proponent is an Italian running and cycling coach named Conconi. The
heart rate deflection point is therefore sometimes also called the Conconi point.

-IIn-between training period
See competition training period.
Individual anaerobic threshold
The individual anaerobic threshold (IAT) refers to the lactate value at which the athlete can
maintain an effort for a longer period of time (at least 20 min). A lot of specific protocols have
been developed in order to determine the IAT based on the lactate curve of a step test. However,
the validity of these procedures is subject to a lot of controversies. It is thought that the IAT
coincides with the maximum lactate steady state or lactate threshold. The individual anaerobic
threshold is based on the premise that the anaerobic threshold is different for each individual as
opposed to one fixed lactate value. Hence the emphasis on “individual” in the term.
Intensity
The intensity of an exercise is a measure of how fast one is swimming, cycling or running during
an exercise. In strength training it is defined as the resistance the athlete has to overcome in order
to complete the workout.
Intensive (intense)
The terms “extensive” and “intensive” refer to different characteristics of the training efforts
depending upon whether they are used in Europe or in the US and Canada. European coaches use
both terms to refer to the intensity of the training sets (resp. low intensity and high intensity) while
the Americans and Canadians rather assign these terms to the volume of the exercise. In this book
“extensive” and “intensive” refer to respectively “low intensity (low swimming speed)” and “high
intensity (fast swimming speed)”.
Interval distance
See repeat distance.
Interval swimming

In this type of exercise the total distance is interrupted by periods of rest. Interval sets can be
used:
to improve the aerobic and anaerobic capacity and power
as sprint training
as frequency training (stroke rate training)
Interval sets will be composed differently depending upon whether their objective is to affect the
aerobic or anaerobic processes. The balance between rest, volume and intensity of the workout
will determine to what extent both metabolic systems will be activated. By changing the balance
between those different training elements (rest, volume and intensity) you can gradually move
through the 4 types of exercises.

-LLactate
Lactate is a naturally occurring organic compound produced in everyone’s body and is both a byproduct of and a fuel for exercise. It is found in the muscles, the blood and various organs. The
body needs it to function properly. A term that is often associated with lactate is lactic acid. They
are very close chemically. We use the term lactate even though in many places lactic acid might
be technically right. The use of lactate instead of lactic acid should not interfere with any
interpretation. The primary source of lactate is the breakdown of a carbohydrate called glycogen.
Lactate curve
For as long as lactate has been used in sports to optimize training efficiency, the lactate curve has
been considered as the starting point for describing and defining the athlete’s conditioning profile.
When, for example, a swimmer is asked to perform a set of progressively faster swims, lactate
will be low after the first and very extensive repeat, but will rise clearly from a certain speed on (=
lactate onset). The faster the subsequent swims, the higher the lactate reading will be. Plotting the
swimming speed against the respective lactate values in a lactate-speed diagram and connecting
all these points with a line (curve) shows the lactate curve.
Lactate elimination
The elimination is the process of removing lactate from the muscle and the bloodstream. Lactate
is a very dynamic substance. When lactate is produced, it will probably leave the muscle and enter
the space between muscle cells where there is a lower concentration of lactate. From there it either
enters neighboring muscles or the bloodstream. It could end up in another muscle nearby or
someplace else in the body.
If lactate is taken up by another muscle it will probably be turned back into pyruvate and be used
for aerobic energy. Endurance training increases 1) the enzymes that readily convert lactate to
pyruvate and 2) transporters that facilitate the movement of lactate back and forth across the cell
membrane. Lactate can also be used by the heart as a fuel or go to the liver and be turned back
into glucose and glycogen. It can move from one part of the body to another quickly. There is
even evidence that some lactate turns back into glycogen in the muscles.
The lactate elimination process is also called clearance. The elimination of all lactate above
resting levels is often called recovery, though this term has many other meanings in the training.
Recovery of lactate to resting levels does not mean that the athlete is 100% fit. Despite the
recovery of lactate he can still be fatigued and not be able to perform at his 100%.
Lactate production

Lactate production is the result of the glycolytic process (glycolysis). Therefore the glycolytic
capacity (also the anaerobic capacity) is also called the lactate production capacity in older
literature.
Lactate steady state
If an athlete swims, runs, bikes, rows, etc. at a constant and submaximal speed or effort for a long
period (more than 20 minutes), he or she is performing a steady state workout. Lactate levels
during such a workout will fluctuate at first but eventually the lactate level will settle in at a
constant level. Some coaches have defined steady state workouts as those where the heart rate is
constant during the workout. However, this can be very misleading as these two types of workouts
do not produce the same training effect. A workout that keeps lactate levels steady will not
maintain a constant heart rate.
Lactate shuttle
Lactate shuttle is the process that moves or shuttles lactate around the body. Ordinarily, a muscle
which can use pyruvate for energy will get it from glycogen stored in the muscle. However, if
excess lactate is available in the bloodstream or adjoining muscles, much of this lactate will be
transported to the muscle and will be converted to pyruvate that can be used to produce aerobic
energy.
A common misconception is that lactate is a waste product. Lactate is an important source of fuel
for aerobic energy and much of it gets converted back to glucose and glycogen for future energy
use. So it is definitely not a waste product.
This shuttling of the lactate to other areas of the body lowers the blood lactate levels in the
producing muscles and reduces the troublesome hydrogen ions. The better the body can be trained
to clear lactate from the producing muscles the longer the athlete will be able to sustain a high
effort at the end of a race or during practice.
The German researcher W. Hollmann first noticed this process in the 1950’s. The term lactate
shuttle was coined by George Brooks who along with several of his colleagues have researched
this process thoroughly.
Lactate threshold
Lactate threshold is the maximum effort that can be sustained for an extended period without
lactate steadily accumulating. It is also called the maximum lactate steady state (MaxLa ss ).
Other terms that are sometimes used for this concept are OBLA (onset of blood lactate) and
lactate turnpoint. These terms refer however to other characteristics of the lactate behavior than
the lactate threshold.
Lactate tolerance
Lactate tolerance is the ability of the person to withstand the intense pain that is produced by high
acid levels in the muscles. It is primarily a mental training as opposed to buffering which is a
physical training.
While lactate tolerance is primarily associated with the pain caused by acidosis in the muscles
during intense activity, this pain will ease up quickly as the intensity eases or the activity stops.
The soreness in muscles the day after exercise is often blamed on lactate but has in fact nothing to
do neither with lactate nor with hydrogen ions.
Lactic
Lactic refers to the presence of lactate production; e.g. lactic energy supply tells us that lactate is
produced during the energy supply.
Lamax
Is the abbreviation for the highest post exercise lactate concentration.

Load density
When several high intense and/or high voluminous sets are given in a short period of time, the
load density is high. The load density refers thus to the rate of occurrence of intense or
voluminous workouts over a certain period of time, such as a week.
Locomotor system
The locomotor system refers to the whole complex of body components that are involved in
human motion (muscles, joints, tendons, etc.).

-MMacrocycle
A macrocycle stretches over several months and covers a specific season such as the short course
season. There are usually 2 macrocycles per year, but the competition calendar sometimes forces
the coach to plan for 3 to 4 macrocycles. This is only possible for the very top level swimmers,
however. For age group swimmers, it is advisable to stick to 2 macrocycles per year since more
macrocycles would hurt the long-term build-up of their conditioning. Since it is not possible to
train all the conditioning features necessary to deliver a top performance at the same time, the
macrocycle has to be split into various smaller training periods. Each of these periods, called
mesocycle, normally lasts 3 to 6 weeks and is designed to improve specific aspects of the athlete’s
conditioning.
Each macrocycle covers :

* the base training period
* the competition training period (pre- and in-between
competition training period)

and is followed by:

* the transition period , which is a period of relaxation

Depending on the swimmer’s conditioning profile and the competition calendar the coach will
structure the macrocycle differently by varying:
the number and duration of the training units per week
the total training volume per week
the volume and frequency per week of the different types of training exercises (water
training as well as dry-land training)
Maximum force
The maximum force is the highest force that can be generated for the execution of a single
movement. Depending on the movement, the muscle groups involved, etc. the maximal force
measurements will quantitatively differ.
MaxLa ss
See lactate threshold and anaerobic threshold.
Mesocycle
A mesocycle is a succession of a few microcycles; depending on the training objectives and on the
conditioning level of the swimmer the mesocycle will last about 2 to 7 weeks. It always contains a
phase of hard work (working or high load phase) followed by a phase of relatively easy training
(regeneration phase).

A working or high load phase ; a period of voluminous and/or intensive work,
whereby training volume and/or training intensity are gradually increased. This does
not mean that the coach will progressively increase the intensity and/or volume of
every consecutive training unit. He will instead increase the intensity and/or volume
of the main training workouts or add an extra quality set (workout at an intensity
higher than regeneration). Thus, the swimmer still goes through a lot of regeneration
training but these low intensity exercises will either compensate for more intense and
voluminous main workouts or be more often alternated with intensive work
A regeneration phase or period of relative rest before starting the next mesocycle.
The last regeneration phase of the mesocycle prior to the top competition is also
called the taper phase and is meant to make the swimmer “100% competition ready”
physiologically, technically as well as mentally, i.e. fully recovered (especially with
respect to the neuromuscular processes) and eager to compete
Metabolic activity - Metabolism
Refers to the biochemical activity in the cells that produces energy to live or to sustain a physical
exercise.
Microcycle
The smallest training cycle is called a microcycle. It provides a detailed training program for a
period lasting from a few days to one week, in which case it is also called week plan.
Mileage
Refers to the volume covered over a period of time.
Mitochondria
These are protein structures in the muscle cell, which produce aerobic energy. Endurance training
increases the density of mitochondria in certain cells. Mitochondria are the part of cells that
convert pyruvate into energy. The denser they are the higher the capacity of the cell to use
pyruvate as fuel and produce more energy aerobically. Many sports physiologists have used the
metaphor of a factory to describe mitochondria. When the mitochondria finish processing
pyruvate there is a lot of energy available as well as common waste products such as water,
carbon dioxide and heat.
Mitochondria are very dense in slow twitch muscle fibers (Type I) and in some fast twitch fibers
(type IIa). There are far fewer mitochondria in type IIb fast twitch fibers. Type IIa fast twitch
fibers have the ability to produce aerobic energy while type IIb fast twitch fibers, with very few
mitochondria, produce hardly any aerobic energy. Over time, with sustained endurance training,
many of the type IIb fibers will convert to type IIa fibers. Since Type IIb fast twitch fibers are
usually the main source of lactate during exercise, this conversion will cause less lactate to be
produced.
mmol/l
This is the basic measure of lactate. Most measures of lactate use a blood sample, though many
researchers have taken muscle samples and measured the lactate in the actual muscle. There is a
high correlation between blood lactate and muscle lactate. It is relatively easy to measure the
lactate in blood with a portable lactate analyzer.
When a blood sample is taken, the amount of lactate is expressed as a concentration of mmol
(millimoles) per liter. For example, resting blood lactate levels in humans are usually between 1.0

mmol/l and 2.0 mmol/l. Lactate levels in some athletes after major competitions have been as high
as 25-30 mmol/l though levels this high are rare.
Muscle fibers
There are several different muscle fiber types but most use the term to refer to three types of
muscle fibers, which make up nearly all the muscle fibers in the body. These are Slow Twitch
Fibers and two types of Fast Twitch Fibers. Slow Twitch Fibers contract at a slower speed than
Fast Twitch Fibers. Slow Twitch Fibers (ST) are also called Type I or Red fibers (since they are
red colored.) They produce large amounts of aerobic energy. There are several fast twitch fibers
but the two most important ones are Fast Twitch Oxidative (FOG) or Type IIa (red) and Fast
Twitch Glycolytic (FG) or Type IIb (white). The fast twitch fibers can produce more anaerobic
energy than slow twitch fibers. Type IIa can also produce high levels of aerobic energy while
Type IIb produces little aerobic energy.
During everyday activity our muscles mainly use the slow twitch fibers. As exercise intensity
increases additional muscle fibers are recruited which are not used often in everyday activity.
Many of these are “fast twitch” fibers. Fast twitch fibers are not very good at turning pyruvate into
aerobic energy. Hence a lot of this pyruvate turns into lactate. The proportion of muscle fiber
types varies between people. Thus, some people produce lots of lactate and others produce very
little.

-OOrganic compound
An organic compound is composed of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen.
Oxidation capacity
Refers to the capacity to break down organic compounds by using oxygen.
Oxygen uptake
The oxygen uptake is the process that occurs in the lung when oxygen is transferred from the
inspired air to the bloodstream. The more oxygen is used by the working muscles, and eventually
other organs, the higher the oxygen uptake that will “refill” the bloodstream with oxygen.

-PPeak form
The peak form is a temporary but stable condition, which enables the swimmer to realize a top
performance in his specific discipline.
Periodization
The training periodization, arranges, organizes, schedules and fixes the timing as well as the
duration of each type of training, testing, etc. for one year according to the fixed objectives. The
training periodization is the break down of a training year into different sequential and mutually
dependent training periods (cycles) to bring the swimmer into peak form at the right moment.
Planning
The planning of training denotes the preparatory work of the coach and consists of structuring the
training process in a systematic way according to the training objectives and the swimmer’s
conditioning level. It is based on the coach’s experience and on his knowledge of sports sciences.
Power training exercises
The exercises used for the fine-tuning are referred to as power training workouts. They are
focused on maximizing the contribution of the acquired capacities of the athlete.

Pre-competition training period
See competition training period.
Progressive exercise test
The most common test protocol to measure lactate is the progressive exercise test, also called
graded exercise test or step test. For example, an athlete runs, swims, cycles or rows at
progressively faster speeds, while a coach, sports physiologist or technician measures the lactate
level at each speed. The athlete can also be on a stationary cycle ergometer and use power ratings
instead of velocity. A rower could be rowing at a certain stroke rate or at a power rating on a
rowing ergometer. When lactate is plotted against power or speed, the obtained lactate curve is
respectively a lactate performance curve (LPC) or a lactate velocity curve (LVC).
Progressive tests can proceed till the athlete is completely exhausted or stop at some point where
the necessary information is obtained. For example, it is common to stop a progressive test after
the athlete has reached the lactate threshold or some pre-determined lactate concentration such as
4.0 mmol/l lactate.
Proteins
Are composed by many amino acids and mostly have important functions in our organism.
Pyruvate
Pyruvate is an organic compound. It is the end product of the glycolysis. When pyruvate further
breaks down, it produces much more energy. This energy is called aerobic because this process
uses oxygen. If pyruvate does not break down most of it turns into lactate, though small amounts
may change into other substances. The chemical formula is very similar to lactate.

-RRealization phase
The whole process of making training plans goes through various steps that can mainly be
bundled in 2 distinctive phases:
- the design phase
- the realization phase (execution and steering)
The realization phase consists of 2 parts:
Execution:
- Training
- Training documentation and training evaluation
Steering:
Evaluation of the training effect:
If observed
training effect = expected effect

☐ continue plan

observed training effect = not expected effect

If
☐ adapt plan

Regeneration
Regeneration is the process that starts after an exercise, that eliminates fatigue and restores or
exceeds the previous performance level.
Repeat distance
An exercise is often divided into partial distances, called repeat distances or intervals, which refer
to the length of each swim.
Rest

The rest refers to the amount of time allowed between intervals, sets or exercises in a training
session. The rest can be active (swimming at very low intensity) or passive (no swimming at all).
Retraining
Training starts again after a period of no training.

-SSet
Workout consisting of a number of repeat distances or intervals.
Set distance
The set distance (volume) of an exercise is the total number of meters of the whole set.
Slope of the lactate curve
Refers to the mathematical slope of the lactate curve. Some researchers believe that the slope of
the curve reflects the capacity of the athlete to sustain power for a longer period. Little research
exists on this subject, and moreover it is controversial.
Explosive force
Refers to the highest force that can be generated explosively.
Sport specific
Refers to the specific characteristics of the sport. A test on for example a cycling ergometer is not
a sport specific test for a swimmer.
Spot test
See control test.
Sprint interval
Is an interval workout that meets the criteria appropriate to improve sprint speed.
Standard lactate test
A standard lactate test is a fix protocol with respect to the athlete’s specialty and is carried out
periodically. This test is intended to provide an overall assessment of an athlete’s conditioning. It
is usually a kind of progressive exercise test but can also include other elements such as an all-out
test or a clearance test.
Steering principle
Steering refers to the methodology a coach uses to improve training efficiency. This method
consists in comparing the expected training adaptations (= objectives = what he wants to achieve)
with those observed in competition, tests and training. Based on this evaluation that takes place
every 4-6 weeks, the coach may decide to adjust training or to continue his original training
program.
Step test
See progressive exercise test.
Strength training
Strength training is working with weights on dry-land. Strength training to increase maximum
force (MFST) is considered to be capacity training while strength training to increase
explosiveness (EXST) and strength training to maintain a high force involvement for a long
period (ENST) are derived from maximum force training and are therefore labeled as power
training. It is important to prepare the swimmers for strength training well in advance. We
therefore advise at least 1 year of conditional gymnastics and 1 year of EXST with light weights
before starting a real strength training program as described below. The first 2 years should, thus,

be considered as an introduction to strength training, provide an adequate basis of general strength
and teach swimmers how to work correctly with weights to avoid injuries once the “serious” work
begins.
Stroke rate training
See frequency training.
Structural adaptation
See functional adaptations.
Submaximal
Submaximal refers to an intensity (e.g. speed) “lower than maximal” with respect to the distance
tat has to be covered. This means that a submaximal speed on a 100 m distance may be higher
than the maximal speed on a 400 m race.
Super-compensation
When training the swimmer becomes tired and his physical performance drops. If he is then
granted some regeneration training (training at very low intensity or active rest) and more rest
between the training sessions, his physical performance will return to the starting level and several
biological adaptations (normalization of the cell environment, recovery of neuromuscular
stimulation processes, restoration of enzyme activity, replenishment of energy sources, etc.) will
take place. After this recovery period the physical performance will further increase above the
initial level. This process is called the super-compensation. The swimmer will now be able to
handle the same load as before but with less strain or a more intense load with the same ease.

-TTechnique training
For technique training there are 2 types of exercises:
Type I:

technique training swims to teach and correct the stroke

pattern
For this type of training the rules are fairly strict and should be followed exactly. To be able to
learn the stroke patterns correctly the swimmer has to be fresh and fit; it is therefore important:
✽
to schedule these exercises at the beginning of the training session, just
after the warm-up
✽

to ensure that the rest between the intervals is long (to allow full recovery)

and will be used by the coach to make corrections or give feed-back to his
swimmer
✽
Type II:

to keep the volume and the repeat distance short and the intensity low
technique training swims (drills) to help automate the proper stroke

pattern. In other words, the swimmer will acquire the stroke skills without thinking (=
automation)
For the drills intended to automate the proper stroke pattern, volume and repeat distance
should be made progressively longer, the rest shorter and the intensity higher. Their objective

is to gradually achieve the correct form in the normal training rhythm
Threshold training
All workouts performed at the intensity corresponding to the anaerobic threshold can be used for
threshold training. In these workouts, rest is mostly short and volume high.
Top level training phase
This phase of a swimmer’s career starts between 17 and 19 years of age and lasts at least 4 years.
As opposed to the build-up phase, where the training goals were still general, broad and rough, the
objectives of the top level training are:
almost entirely determined by the specific needs of each swimmer individually
the maximal development of all swim specific and performance determining
conditioning components (developing the individual peak form). Nevertheless, the
conditioning qualities that only indirectly determine the competition performance need
also to reach an optimum level and be stabilized
the perfection of the technique, now focused on the quality of execution in competition
(frequency, amplitude, etc.) rather than on the correctness of the moving pattern
the involvement of the swimmer in the planning and training processes
It is thus in this phase essential to assess:
a profile of the swimmer’s weak and strong characteristics
the swimmer’s ability to react and adapt to the various training exercises
This requires an ongoing observation of the evolution of the swimmer’s conditioning level (based
on training, competition and test results) and an evaluation of the training actually completed.
This should indicate whether or not the swimmer has optimally adapted to the prescribed training
program.
Trainability
Refers to the ability of a swimmer to respond positively to different types of training.
Training concept
In many countries, the sports federation fixes the training concept which contains general
indications and instructions on training objectives, performance evolution, qualification times,
compulsory training camps, high priority meetings, trials, etc.
Training cycle
A group of training units forms a specific training period or training cycle. These cycles are
characterized by the time they last and will be repeated frequently during the swimming season.
The smallest cycle is called a microcycle. In swimming a microcycle generally covers 1 training
week. A mesocycle is a succession of a few microcycles, lasts about 2 to 7 weeks and contains a
phase of hard work followed by a phase of relatively easy training. The duration of this period
will depend upon the training objectives during that training period and on the conditioning level
of the swimmer. A macrocycle consists of several mesocycles. It stretches over several months

and covers a specific season such as the short course season. It covers the base, competition and
transition training periods. There are usually 2 macrocycles per year, but the competition calendar
sometimes forces the coach to plan for 3 to 4 macrocycles. This is only possible for the very top
level swimmers, however. For age group swimmers, it is advisable to stick to 2 macrocycles per
year since more macrocycles would hurt the long-term build-up of their conditioning.
Training effect
Is the response to several training units. A positive response will lead to an improvement.
Training load
Is the combination of intensity and volume the swimmer undergoes during training.
Training log
Documentation of the completed training.
Training objective
A training objective describes the training adaptations expected from training.
Training plan
A training plan is a table of contents which lists, for swimmers of every performance level, all the
elements needed to help them improve their competitive performance. It usually covers more than
one year but the time allocated to the different elements is still quite rough.
The key elements recorded in a training plan are, in order of importance:
the main competitions (e.g. participation in school competitions, in international
events,...)
the main conditioning / mental / technical improvements to be achieved
the expected evolution in performance (the key objectives for each year, e.g. make top 3
at NJO’s in 2 years, break 1 minute in 100 m backstroke,...)
a general description of the swim and dry-land training (e.g. other sports activities to
complete the swim training, possibly altitude training,...)
the number of training units (sessions) and the total mileage per week (e.g. when to start
with training twice a day,...)
the tests to support and control the effectiveness of the training (e.g. video analysis,
lactate tests,...)
non sport related commitments (sponsor or school commitments,...)
Training outline
The training outline is based on the training concept and provides the general guidelines for
structuring the training process for a well-defined group (possibly one single swimmer) during 1
or more years. It is a rather theoretical training model and depends on:

the sport (e.g. swimming, running, etc.)
the sports discipline (e.g. sprint, middle or long distance, etc.)

Training session
An effective training session (unit) generally consists of the following parts completed in the
suggested order:

1. The warm-up
The goals are:

•

relaxation and relief from the daily stress (e.g. school, work,

etc.)
•

physiological preparation (e.g. cardiovascular)
•

preparation of the muscles (e.g. to induce muscle

tension for the sprint work to come)
Following the warm-up there are 1 or 2 main parts made up to meet the objectives of the
mesocycle:

2. The first main part : this part includes exercises of a high technical and coordination
level requiring a well rested athlete and meant to induce conditioning adaptations and/or
to improve the technical abilities (e.g. frequency (stroke rate) training, anaerobic
capacity training, sprint training or technique training, ...)

3. short regeneration exercise : the higher the intensity of the first main part, the more
indispensable the regeneration exercise becomes

4. The second main part : this part includes swimming that induces conditioning
adaptations but does not require high technical or coordination skills, such as long
endurance repeats

5. The cool-down : this part of the training is very important since it starts the recovery and
regeneration phase that will lead to the super-compensation. An active start of the
regeneration not only speeds up the recovery process but also the time for supercompensation
Training stimulus
Is the trigger sent to the organism to induce a training effect. This trigger contains a message that
is defined by the combination of intensity, volume, rest and interval of the workout. Depending on
the characteristics of the message, different training effects will be induced.
Training unit
See training session.
Training volume
Is the amount of meters covered during training.
Transition period
The transition period is the third and last part of a macrocycle and consists in a period of relative
rest with a temporary regression of conditioning after the peak form was reached.
Transporters

Transporters are proteins that facilitate the movement of other compounds from one part of the
body to another. Lactate transporters help carry lactate over the cell walls and other membranes in
the cell. They have recently become a hot topic of research since some scientists think that these
transporters may affect the athletic performance.

-VVegetative system
Is the complex of all organs that are under control of the autonomic nervous system, i.e. without
any interference of one’s own will.
Ventilatory threshold
The term ventilatory threshold (VT) has been given to the place where oxygen and carbon dioxide
patterns change suddenly. It happens very close to the lactate threshold (LT) and many people
assume the same conditions cause both. However, it has been shown that the two are unrelated.
For healthy athletes they are close enough together to use the VT as an estimate of the LT. While
oxygen consumption and carbon dioxide release data are very valuable, finding the VT has been a
problem for sports scientists as the data are often not clear.
VLamax
Is the maximal lactate/pyruvate production capacity and quantifies the anaerobic capacity.
VO 2 max
Is the maximal oxygen uptake and quantifies the aerobic capacity.
Volume
A measure of how much training is performed. In strength training it is defined as the total
number of repetitions, or the total amount of weight lifted in a specific period of time.
V4
The speed corresponding to a blood lactate concentration of 4 mmol/l.

-WWave principle
To ensure a continuous improvement of conditioning, it is not only necessary to change the
training load after approximately 6 weeks but also to provide regular periods of regeneration
training for the super-compensation to take place. The structure of an effective and successful
training process will therefore be characterized by a continuous alternation of periods of increased
training load (training units at a higher intensity and/or volume) and periods of reduced training
(regeneration training).
This alternation of intensive or high volume training and regeneration sessions is often referred to
as the wave principle of training.
Workout
The exercise a coach asks to perform.
30-minute test
The 30-minute test (T30) provides a fairly accurate estimation of the swimmer’s aerobic
endurance and offers an acceptable alternative for the 400 m lactate test. The evaluation of the
aerobic capacity by the 30-minute test is of course not as accurate as using lactate tests, but
nevertheless it enables the coach to:
measure the swimmer’s aerobic endurance

purposefully build up the training
calculate the training intensity for the endurance exercises
This test requires the swimmer to swim as far as possible in 30 min at a steady speed. The first
time the swimmer uses this type of test he can aim for times that are 1 to 2 sec/100 m slower than
his 1500 m or 800 m split times.
Research has shown that the average swimming speed recorded during the 30-minute test (total
distance/time in seconds) corresponds closely to the aerobic capacity determined by lactate tests.
It was established that generally the longer the distance swum in 30 min, the better the aerobic
endurance. The average swimming speed of the swimmers with a very strong aerobic endurance
is lower than the 4 mmol/l lactate speed of the 400 m submaximal lactate test. Swimmers with a
weaker aerobic endurance, on the other hand, are capable of completing the 30-minute test at a
higher velocity than the 4 mmol/l lactate speed of 400 m submaximal lactate test.

REFERENCES
TRAINING LITERATURE
Bauersfeld K.H. and G. Schröter (Ltg.): Grundlagen der Leichtathletik. Berlin, 1979
Counsilman J.E.: Competitive swimming manual for coaches and swimmers. Pelham Books
LTD, 1978
Findeisen D.G.R., P.G. Linke and L. Pickenhain: Grundlagen der Sportmedizin für Studenten,
Sportlehrer und Trainer. Leipzig, 1976
Fuchs U. and M. Reiß: Höhentraining. Deutscher Sportbund Bundesausschuß Leistungssport,
Trainerbibliothek 27, Philippka-Verlag, Münster, 1990
Grosser M. and E. Zimmermann: Aspekte der biologischen Adaptation. In: Leistungssport 11, 4,
245-259, 1981
Howat R.C.L. and M.W. Robson: The use of peak lactates after racing - a ten year study.
Swimming Times, 24-25, May 1999
Jackson A., A.S. Jackson and R.G. Frankiewicz: The construct and concurrent validity of a 12minute crawl stroke swim as a field test of swimming endurance. Res. Quart. 50, 641-648, 1979
Keul J. et al: Biomechanische Grundlagen des Kinderleistungssports. In: DSB (Hrsg.).
Belastbarkeit des Kinder und Jugendlichen im Leistungssport. Beiheft zu Leistungssport 28, 2846, 1982
Louwagie M.: Zwemmen van initiatie tot trainen. Publicatiefonds voor Lichamelijke Opvoeding,
Gent, 1990
Maglischo E.W.: Swimming even faster. Mayfield Publishing Company, 1993
Melitzer J.: Probleme und trainingsmethodische Ansätze zur wirksameren Gestaltung des
Voraussetzungstrainings an Land bei Schwimmsportlern im Nachwuchsbereich. In: Sport und
Wissenschaft 2, Leistungsvoraussetzungen im Nachwuchstraining, 71-80,
Olbrecht J.: De praktische betekenis van laktaatonderzoekingen voor trainingsplanning en
trainingsuitvoering. In: Adam A., A. De Bruyn, E. De Witte, E. Bammens and F. Reyskens.
Limburgs Congres Sportgeneeskunde, 279-291, 1991
Olbrecht J.: Neue Erkentnisse zur Laktatdiagnose und deren Bedeutung für das Training. In:
Freitag W. (ed). DSTV-Trainer-lehrgang, Schwimmen: Lernen und Optimieren, Band 7, 21-28,
1994
Olbrecht J.: Die Bedeutung des Laktats für die Optimierung des Trainings: Einige Beispiele aus
der Praxis - Schwimmen -. In: Freitag W. (ed). DSTV-Trainerlehrgang, Schwimmen: Lernen und
Optimieren, Band 9, 119-124, 1995
Olbrecht J.: Praktisches Arbeiten mit Laktatergebnisse. In: Freitag W. (ed). DSTVTrainerlehrgang, Schwimmen: Lernen und Optimieren, Band 12, 78-83, 1996
Olbrecht J.: Plannen, periodiseren, trainen, bijsturen en winnen; handboek voor moderne
zwemtraining. Eigen uitgave, Brussel, 1997
Olbrecht J., A. Mader, Ø. Madsen, H. Liesen and W. Hollmann: La signification des mesures de
lactate pour la performance physique et pour la conduite des entrainements. In: Millet Ch. (ed),
Le message, 23-24, 1986
Olbrecht J., Ø. Madsen, A. Mader, H. Liesen and W. Hollmann: Vergleichende Untersuchungen
des Laktat/Geschwindigkeitsverhaltens im Zweistreckentest über 400m Kraulschwimmen zu 30und 60-minütigen maximale und 30-minütigen submaximalen Schwimmen. In: Dtsch. Z.
Sportmed. 36, 3-8, 1985
Reiß M., P. Löffler, P. Schmidt and R. Schön: Schlüsselprobleme des langfristigen
Leistungsaufbaus. In: Leistungssport 6, 12-16, 1993

Schröter G.: Zur Weiterentwicklung des Systems der Übungen in der Leichtathletik. In: Wiss.
Zeitschr. d. DHfK Leipzig 17, 1, 115-128, 1976
Starischka S.: Trainingsplanung. Studienbrief der Trainerakademie Köln. Hofmann Schorndorf,
1988
Steinhöfer D.: Zur Terminologie und Abgrenzung der Trainingsmethoden. In: Leistungssport 6,
44-50, 1993
Vrijens J.: Basis voor verantwoord trainen. Publicatiefonds voor Lichamelijke Opvoeding, Gent,
1996
Wilke K. and Ø. Madsen: Coaching the young swimmer. Pelham Books, London, 1983
Wilson C.: Methods of water training. In: Cross R. and C. Wilson (eds), Swimming, teaching and
coaching, Level two, 29-40, 1993
Wilson C.: Monitoring. In: Cross R. and C. Wilson (eds), Swimming, teaching and coaching,
Level two, 41-56, 1993
Wilson C.: Planning. In: Cross R. and C. Wilson (eds), Swimming, teaching and coaching, Level
two, 82-95, 1993

SPORTS SCIENCES LITERATURE
Astrand P.O.: Aerobic power. In: Eriksson B., B. Furberg (eds), Swimming Medicine IV.
University Park Press, Baltimore, 127-131, 1978
Astrand P.O., L. Engström, B.O. Eriksson, P. Karlberg, I. Nylander and B. Saltin: Girl swimmers
with special reference to respiratory and circulatory adaption and gynecological and psychiatric
aspects. Acta Pädiat. Suppl. 147, 43-63, 1963
Astrand P.O. and B. Saltin: Maximal oxygen uptake and heart rate in various types of muscular
activity. J. Appl. Physiol. 16, 577-581, 1961
Bacou F., P. Rouanet, C. Barjot, C. Janmot, P. Vigneron and A. d’Albis: Expression of myosin
isoforms in denervated, cross-reinnervated and electrically stimulated rabbit muscles. Eur. J.
Biochem. 236, 539-547, 1996
Barjot C., P. Rouanet, P. Vigneron, C. Janmot, A. d’Albis and F. Bacou: Transformation of slowor fast-twitch rabbit muscles after cross-reinnervation or low frequency stimulation does not alter
the in vitro properties of their satellite cells. J. of Muscle Research and Cell Motility 19, 25-32,
1998
Booth F.W.: Effects of endurance exercise on cytochrome c turnover in skeletal muscle. Annals
N.Y. Acad. Sci., 301, 431-439, 1977
Borg G.A.V.: Psychophysical bases of perceived exertion. Medicine and Science in Sports and
Exercise 14 (5), 377-381, 1982
Buchthal F. and H. Schmalbruch: Motor unit of mammalian muscle. Physiol. Reviews 60 (1), 90140, 1980
Capelli C., D.R. Pendergast and B. Termin: Energetics of swimming at maximal speeds in
humans. Eur. J. Applied Physiol. 78 (5), 385-393, October 1998
Cellini M., P. Vitiello, A. Nagliati, P.G. Ziglio, S. Martinelli, E. Ballarin and F. Conconi:
Noninvasive determination of the anaerobic threshold in swimming. Int. J. Sports Med. 7, 347351, 1986
Chatard J.P., M. Paulin and J.R. Lacour: Postcompetition blood lactate measurements and
swimming performance: illustrated by data from a 400m olympic record holder. In: Ungerechts
B., K. Wilke and K. Reischle (eds). Swimming Science V, Human Kinetics, Illinois, 311-316,
1988
Chwilkowski N.: Wertigkeit des Conconi-Tests zur Bestimmung der anaeroben Schwelle beim
Schwimmen. Diplomarbeit der Deutsche Sporthoschule Köln, 1988

Dawson M.J.: Phosphorus metabolites and the control of glycolysis studied by nuclear magnetic
resonance. In: Knuttgen J., A. Vogel and J. Poortmans (eds.). Biochemistry of exercise.
International Series on Sports Sciences 13. Human Kinetics Publishers, Inc Champaign, Illinois,
1983
De Marées H.: Sportphysiologie. Medizin von Heute 10. 5. Aufl. Tropon, Köln, 1987
Di Prampero P.E., D.R. Pendergast, D.W. Wilson and D.W. Rennie: Energetics of swimming
man. J. Appl. Physiol. 37, 1-5, 1974
Di Prampero P.E.: Energetics of muscular exercise. Rev. Physiol. Biochem. Pharmacol. 89, 143,
1981
Dixon R.W. and J.A. Faulkner: Cardiac outputs during maximum effort running and swimming.
J. Appl. Physiol. 35, 653-656, 1971
Dudley G.A., W.M. Abraham and R.L. Terjung: Influence of exercise intensity and duration on
biochemical adaptations in skeletal muscle. Journal of Applied Physiology 53 (4), 844-850, 1982
Eriksson B.O., K. Berg and J. Taranger: Physiological analysis of young boys starting intensive
training in swimming. In: Eriksson B., B. Furberg (eds). Swimming Medicine IV, University Park
Press, Baltimore, 140-160, 1978
Eriksson B.O., I. Holmer and A. Lundin: Physiological effects of training in elite swimmers. In:
Eriksson B., B. Furberg (eds). Swimming Medicine IV, University Park Press, Baltimore, 177178, 1978
Freund H.: Motor unit and muscle activity in voluntary motor control. Physiol. Reviews 63 (2),
387-436, 1983
Gladden L.B.: Lactate transport and exchange during exercise. Handbook of physiology, Section
12, 614-648
Guillet R., J. Genéty and E. Brunet-Guedj: Abrégé de médecine du sport, 3me édition, Masson,
Paris, 1980
Gullstrand L. and I. Holmer: Physiological characteristics of champion swimmers during a fiveyear follow-up period. In: Hollander A.P., P.A. Huijing and G. De Groot (eds). Biomechanics and
medicine in swimming. Human Kinetics, Illinois, 258-262, 1983
Heck H., A. Mader, G. Hess, S. Mücke, R. Müller and W. Holland: Justification of the 4-mmol/l
lactate threshold. Int. J. Sports Med. 6, 117-130, 1985
Hermansen L. and B. Saltin: Blood lactate concentration during exercise at acute exposure to
altitude. In: Margaria R. (ed). Exercise at altitude. Exc. Med. Fond, Amsterdam, 48-53, 1967
Hollmann W. and Th. Hettinger: Sportmedizin, Arbeits- und Trainingsgrundlagen. 3. Aufl.
Schattauer Stuttgart-New York, 1990
Holmer I.: Oxygen uptake during swimming in man. J. Appl. Physiol. 33, 502-509, 1972
Holmer I.: Physiology of swimming man. Acta Physiol. Scand. (suppl. 407), 1-53, 1974
Holmer I.: Energetics and mechanical work in swimming. In: Hollander A.P., P.A. Huijing and G.
De Groot (eds). Biomechanics and medicine in swimming. Human Kinetics, Illinois, 154-164,
1983
Holmer I., A. Lundin and B.O. Eriksson: Maximum oxygen uptake during swimming and
running by elite swimmers. J. Appl. Physiol. 36 (6), 711-714, 1974
Holmer I., E.M. Stein, B. Saltin, B. Ekblom and P.O. Astrand: Haemodynamic and respiratory
responses compared in swimming and running. J. Appl. Physiol. 37, 49-54, 1974
Ikai M.: Trainability of muscular endurance as related to age. X. ICHPER-Kongreß, Vancouver,
1967
Ivy J.L., D.L. Costill, P.J. Vanhandel, D.A. Essig and R.W. Lower: Alternation in the lactate
threshold with changes in substrate availability. Int. J. Sports Med. 2, 139-142, 1981
Jagemann K., B. Pansold and W. Roth: Die Rolle des Laktats bei der Einschätzung des
muskulären Trainingszustandes und einige kritische Bemerkungen zum “base excess”-LaktatVerhalten. Med. U. Sport 9, 174-179, 1969

Jakowlew N.N.: Sportbiochemie. Leipzig, 1977
Juel C.: Lactate-proton cotransport in skeletal muscle. Physiological Reviews 77 (2), 321-358,
April 1997
Kasch F.W.: Maximal oxygen uptake in older male swimmers during free swimming and
sationary cycling. In: Eriksson B. and Furberg B. (eds). Swimming Medicine IV, Baltimore
(Maryland), 143-146, 1978
Kelly M., G. Gibney, J. Mullins, T. Ward, B. Donne and M. O’Brien: A study of blood lactate
profiles across different swim strokes. In: Maclaren D., T. Reilly, A. Lees (eds). Swimming
Sciences VI, Biomechanics and medicine, E & F.N. Spon, London, 227-234, 1992
Keul J., S. Simon, A. Berg, H.H. Dickhut, I. Goertler and R. Kübel: Bestimmung der
individuellen anaeroben Schwelle zur Leistungsbewertung und Trainingsgestaltung. Dtsch. Z.
Sportmed. 30, 212-218, 1979
Kindermann W., G. Simon and J. Keul: The significance of the aerobic-anaerobic transition for
the determination of work load intensities during endurance training. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 42,
24-34, 1979
Konstantaki M. and I.L. Swaine: Lactate and cardiopulmonary responses to simulated armpulling and leg-kicking in collegiate and recreational swimmers. Int. J. Sports Med. 20 (2), 118121, February 1999
Léger L.A., V. Seliger and L. Brassard: Backward extrapolation of VO 2 max values from the O
2 recovery curve. Med. Sci. Sports Exercise 12, 24-27, 1980

Mader A. and H. Heck: A theory of the metabolic origin of “anaerobic threshold”. Int. J. Sports
Med. 7, 45-65, 1986
Mader A., H. Heck and W. Hollmann: Leistung und Leistungsbegrenzung des menschlichen
Organismus interpretiert am Modell thermodynamisch offener Systeme. Ein Beitrag zur
Diskussion biologischer Leistungsgrenzen im Hochleistungssport. In: H. Rieckert (ed). Sport an
der Grenze der menschlichen Leistungsfähigkeit. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1981
Mader A., Ø. Madsen and W. Hollmann: Zur Bedeutung der Laktaziden Energiebereistellung für
Trainings- und Wettkampfleistungen im Sportschwimmen. Leistungssport 10, 263-279 and 408418, 1980
Mader A., R. Rost and U. Hartmann: Experience with a portable ergospirometry system. Dtsch.
Z. Sportmed., 1991
Madsen Ø.: Untersuchungen über Einflußgrößen auf Parameter des Energiestoffwechsels beim
freien Kraulschwimmen. Dissertation der Deutschen Sporthochschule Köln zur Erlangung des
akademischen Grades Doktor der Sportwissenschaften, 1982
Magel J.R.: Comparison of the physiologic response to varying intensities of submaximal work in
tethered swimming and treadmill running. J. Sports Med. 11, 203-210, 1971
Meyer R.A., M.J. Kushmerick and T.R. Brown: Application of 31p -NMR spectroscopy to the
study of striated muscle metabolism. Am. J. Physiol. 242 (Cell Physiol. 11), C1, 1982
Montpetit R.R., L.A. Léger, J-M. Lavoie and G. Cazorla: VO 2 peak during free swimming using
the backward extrapolation of the O 2 recovery curve. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 47, 385-391, 1981
Nomura T.: Maximal oxygen uptake of age group swimmers. Jap. J. Phys.Educ. 22 (5), 301-309,
1978
Olbrecht J.: Metabolische Beanschpruchung bei Wettkampfschwimmern unterschiedlicher
Leistungsfähigkeit. Stephanie Naglschmidt Verlag, Stuttgart, 1991
Olbrecht J., A. Mader, H. Heck and W. Hollmann: Das Laktat-Schwimmgeschwindigkeitsverhalten in Abhängigkeit von unterschiedlichen Testbedingungen. In: Böning D., K.M.
Braumann, M.W. Busse, N. Maasen and W. Schmidt (eds). Sport - Rettung oder Risiko für die
Gesundheit. Deutscher Ärzte-Verlag, Köln, 413-417, 1989

Olbrecht J., A. Mader, H. Heck and W. Hollmann: Laktaattests, hulpmiddel of bron van ergernis?
Algoritme voor de interpretatie van laktaattests aan de hand van praktische voorbeelden uit de
atletiek. In: Sportmedische Tijdingen 51, 84-97, 1992
Olbrecht J., A. Mader, H. Heck and W. Hollmann: The importance of a calculation scheme to
support the interpretation of lactate tests. In: Maclaren D., T. Reilly, A. Lees (eds). Swimming
Sciences VI, Biomechanics and medicine, E & F.N. Spon, London, 243-249, 1992
Olbrecht J., A. Mader, Ø. Madsen, H. Liesen and W. Hollmann: The relationship of lactic acid to
long-distance swimming and the “2x400m two-speed-test” and the implications for adjusting
training intensities. In: Ungerechts B.E., K. Wilke, K. Reischle (eds). Swimming Sciences V,
Human Kinetics, Champaign, Illinois, 261-267, 1988
Olbrecht J., Ø. Madsen, A. Mader, H. Liesen and W. Hollmann: Relationship between swimming
velocity and lactic concentrations during continuous and intermittent training exercises. In: Int. J.
Sports Med. 6, 74-77, 1985
Pansold B., W. Roth, K. Jagemann and E. Hasart: Alaktazide und laktazide Energiebereitstellung
bei Schwimmbelastungen. Med. u. Sport 13, 107-112, 1973
Pansold B., W. Roth, J. Zinner, E. Hasart and B. Gabriel: Die Laktat-Leistungskurve - ein
Grundprinzip sportmedizinischer Leistungsdiagnostik. Med. u. Sport 22, 107-112, 1982
Roth W., E. Hasart, W. Wolf and B. Pansold: Untersuchungen zur Dynamik der
Energiebereistellung während maximaler Mittelzeitausdauerbelastung. Med. u. Sport 23, 107114, 1983
Roth W., B. Pansold, E. Hasart, J. Zinner and B. Gabriel: Zum Informationsgehalt
leistungsdiagnostischer Parameter in Abhängigkeit von der Zunahme der Leistungsfähigkeit bei
Sportlern. Med. u. Sport 21, 326-336, 1981
Schirmer U.: Untersuchungen des Energiestoffwechsels an Hochleistungsschwimmern auf dem
Fahrradergometer und im freien Kraulschwimmen. Inaugural-Dissertation, Köln, Juli 1986
Simon G., R. Haaker and M. Thiesmann: Anaerobe Schwelle und aerobes Training im
Schwimmsport. In: Rieckert H. (ed). Sportmedizin; Kursbestimmung. Springer, Berlin
Heidelberg New York, 601-604, 1981
Spriet L.L and R.A. Howlett: Metabolic control of energy production during physical activity. In:
Perspectives in Exercise Science, 1-51
Spriet L.L., R.A. Howlett and G.J.F. Heigenhauser: An enzymatic approach to lactate production
in human skeletal muscle during exercise. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc., november 1998
Staron R.: Human skeletal muscle fiber types: delineation, development and distribution. Can. J.
Appl. Physiol. 22 (4), 307-327, 1997
Stephens J.A. and T.P. Usherwood: The mechanical properties of human motorunits with special
reference to their fatiguability and recruitment threshold. Brain Research 125, 91-97, 1977
Weiß M., H.J. Gath, N. Jockers, K. Reischle and H. Weicker: Physiologische Leistungsparameter
bei Schwimmbankbelastung im Vergleich zu Fahrradergometrie und Schwimmleistung. Dtsch. Z.
Sportmed. 38, 161-168, 1987

